---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Money in the Making of World Society
Article-status: accepted
Author: Keith Hart
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  Keith Hart is Centennial Professor of Economic Anthropology at the London Schoolof Economics and International Director at the Human Economy Program, Universityof Pretoria. His writings on money include ‘Heads or Tails? Two Sides of the Coin’(1986), and The Memory Bank: Money in an Unequal World (2000), available at <http://thememoryba nk.co.uk/book/>.
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Money in the Making of World Society

### Keith Hart {.author}

According to writers as varied as John Locke and Karl Marx, ours is an
age of money, a transitional phase in the history of humanity. Seen in
this light, capitalism’s historical mission is to bring cheap
commodities to the masses and to break down the insularity of
traditional communities before it is replaced by a more just society. It
matters where we are in this process, but opinions on that differ
widely. When a third of humanity still works in the fields with their
hands, I would say that capitalism still has a way to go. The Victorians
believed that they stood at the pinnacle of social evolution. I think of
us as being more like the first digging-stick operators, primitives
stumbling into a revolution as significant as the invention of
agriculture. They had no idea that it would culminate in Chinese
civilization and neither can we anticipate what we could be launching
now. We just know that our moment in history is an extremely dangerous
one.

Money has called the present phase of world society into being and I
would like to explore its potential to repair the damage that it has
caused. In the second half of the 20th century, humanity formed a single
interactive social network for the first time. Emergent world society
*is* the new human universal – not an idea, but the fact that 7 billion
of us desperately need to find new principles of association. The task
of building a global civil society for the 21st century is urgent. But
we must lose a lot more before the need to rebuild world society is
likely to be taken seriously. Certainly we have regressed a long way
from the hopes for freedom and equality released by World War II
and the anticolonial revolution that followed it. On the other hand,
growing awareness of the risks for the future of life on this planet
might encourage people to take humanity’s current predicament more
seriously. The ecological (‘green’) paradigm – manifested as concern for
global warming and for scarce food, water and energy supplies – could
replace market fundamentalism as the religion of this emergent world
society. But that will not do us much good if it entails rejecting money
and markets for the illusion of local self-sufficiency.

## The Origins of Our Times

The 1860s saw a transport and communications revolution (steamships,
continental railroads, and the telegraph) that decisively opened up the
world economy. At the same time a series of political revolutions gave
the leading powers of the coming century the institutional means of
organizing industrial capitalism. These were the American Civil War, the
culmination of Italy’s *Risorgimento*, the abolition of serfdom in
Russia, the formation of the Anglo-Indian super-state, Britain’s
democratic reforms at home, and Japan’s Meiji Restoration. German
unification at the end of the decade spilled over into the 1870s through
the Franco-Prussian war, the Paris Commune, and the formation of the
French Third Republic. The First International was formed in 1864 and
Karl Marx published the first volume of *Capital* in 1867. The concentration of so many
epochal events in such a short period would suggest that world society
was quite well integrated even then. But in the 1870s, international
trade accounted for no more than one percent of Gross National Product
in most countries and the most reliable indicator of Britain’s annual
economic performance was the weather at harvest-time.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_1]

Capitalism has always rested on an unequal contract between owners of
large amounts of money and those who make and buy their products. This
contract depends on an effective threat of punishment if workers
withhold their labor or buyers fail to pay up. The owners cannot make
that threat alone: they need the support of governments, laws, prisons,
police, even armies. By the mid-19th century, it became clear that the
machine revolution was pulling unprecedented numbers of people into the
cities, where they added a wholly new dimension to the traditional
problem of crowd control. The political revolutions of the 1860s and 70s
were based on a new and explicit alliance between capitalists and the
military landlord class (who had been sworn enemies in the bourgeois
revolutions) to form states capable of managing industrial workforces
and of taming the criminal gangs that had taken over large swathes of
the main cities. Germany and Japan provide the clearest examples of such
an alliance, which took a specific form in each country.

Before long, governments provided new legal conditions for the
operations of large business corporations, ushering in mass production
through a bureaucratic revolution. The author of this new synthesis
(which I call ‘national capitalism’) was G.W.F. Hegel who argued in *The
Philosophy of Right* that states, run by university-trained bureaucrats,
should regulate capitalist markets with a view to containing their
extreme consequences, while encouraging their material benefits to
accrue to citizens across the board. The national system became general
after World War I and was the dominant social form of 20th
century civilization. Its apogee or ‘golden age’ was in the period
1945-1979.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_2] This was a time of developmental states, economic growth,
and redistribution when, for the first and only time in history, the
purchasing power of working people and the public services available to
them were the principal goals of economic policy everywhere – in the
Soviet bloc and postcolonial states, as well as in the Western
industrial societies. ‘Development’ replaced colonial empire as the norm
of relations between rich and poor countries. When, shortly before his
downfall, Richard Nixon announced that ‘we are all Keynesians now’, he
was reflecting a universal belief that governments had a responsibility
to manage national capitalism in the interests of all citizens.

The 1970s were a watershed. U.S. expenditures on its losing war in
Vietnam generated huge imbalances in the world’s money flows, leading to
a breakdown of the fixed parity exchange-rate system devised at Bretton
Woods in 1944. The dollar’s departure from the gold standard in 1971
triggered a free-for-all in world currency markets, leading immediately
to the invention of money market futures. The world economy was plunged
into depression in 1973 by the formation of the Organization of
Petroleum-Exporting Countries and a hefty rise in the price of oil.
‘Stagflation’ (high unemployment and eroded purchasing power) increased,
opening the way for Reagan, Thatcher, and other neoliberal conservatives
to launch a counter-revolution against social democracy in the name of
giving priority to ‘the market’ rather than ‘the state’. These events
three decades ago and the policies pursued then find their denouement in
the world’s economic crisis today.

In the mid-1970s, all but a minute proportion of the money exchanged
internationally paid for goods and services purchased abroad. Forty
years later, these payments account for only a small fraction of global
money transfers, the vast bulk being devoted to exchanging money for
money in some other form (foreign exchange transactions alone reached
daily turnover rates of U.S. \$5.3 trillion in 2013). This rising tide of
money, sometimes known as ‘the markets’, represents the apotheosis of
financial capitalism, with political management of currencies and trade
having been virtually abandoned in favor of freeing up the global
circuit of capital. As a result, we have lived through an explosion of
money, markets, and telecommunications for more than three decades and
are now experiencing the consequences.

This process of ‘globalization’ represents a rapid extension of society
to a more inclusive level than the 20th century norm, when society was
identified with the nation-state. For us to live in the world together,
we have to devise new ways of doing things for each other that go beyond
the ideal of achieving local self-sufficiency that drove national
economy in the modern era and domestic economy before that.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_3]
Globalization is closely linked to the extension of society by means of
money and markets. I follow a number of writers – Marx, Simmel, Mauss,
Polanyi, Keynes – who believed in money’s centrality to a variety of
options for a better society.

## A Moment in the History of Money

Money is not just a means of exploitation; it also has redemptive
qualities, particularly as a mediator between persons and society. Money
– and the markets it sustains – is itself a human universal, with the
potential to be emancipated from the social engines of inequality that
it currently serves. In the late 90s, I asked what future generations
will be interested in about our times and settled on the development of
communications linking all humanity. This has two striking features:
first, it is a highly unequal market of buyers and sellers fuelled by a
money circuit that has become detached from production and politics; and
second, it is driven by a digital revolution whose symbol is the
internet, the network of networks. Since then I have explored how the
forms of money and exchange are changing in the context of this
communications revolution.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_4]

Money has acquired its apparent pre-eminence because the economy has
been extended rapidly from a national to a global level with much less
social regulation than existed before. Of course, the specialists in
money used their newfound freedom from post-war social democracy to loot
the world in scandalous ways that we will have to repair, if we can.
But, in addition to drawing people *en masse* into unsustainable credit
schemes, they also began to put in place some of the institutional
mechanisms that could make markets work for all of us and not just for
those with lots of money. Capitalism clearly is instrumental in making
world society. It is unlikely to be the basis for its stable
functioning, but it does get us some of the way there.

It is always dangerous when the economy is temporarily extended beyond
the reach of normal society, especially when social frontiers are pushed
rapidly outwards. Our times could be compared with previous episodes in
the history of global capitalism, such as the dash to build continental
railroads, the gold strikes in California, Alaska, and South Africa or
the wild rubber boom of the mid- to late-19th century. Many analogous
episodes may be found in the mercantilist economies that emerged during
the period 1500-1800. The quick wealth and cowboy entrepreneurship we
have witnessed were made possible by the absence of regulation in a
period of global economic expansion. We now have an opportunity to
consider how world markets might be organized in the general interest.

The residue of previous booms and busts included transport and
communication systems; a mildly inflationary gold standard; new
industrial uses for rubber; stock markets, and banking regulations. All
the founders of modern social theory believed that the extension of
society to a more inclusive level has positive features. The world
economy is more integrated than it was even two decades ago; but we need
new forms of political association capable of administering more
effective regulatory frameworks. Fragmentation would be a disaster; but
some would say it has already begun. I would not wish to return to
currency controls and state-managed money, even if they were feasible.
Clearly the political questions facing humanity today concern
distributive justice above all. The long period of Western dominance of
the world economy is coming to an end. New actors on the world stage
will have their say about who gets what. An escalation of war and
general fractiousness is quite likely under these circumstances. A focus
on the socially redemptive qualities of money and markets might then be
quite salutary.

The current crisis of world economy is not merely financial, a phase in
the historical cycle of credit and debt. The removal of political
controls over money in recent decades has led to a situation where
politics is still mainly national, but the money circuit is global and
lawless. The crisis should rather be seen as an irreversible moment in
the history of money, occasioned by the collapse of the money system
that the world lived by in the 20th century. This has been unraveling
since the U.S. Dollar went off gold in 1971, a new regime of floating
currencies emerged, and money derivatives were invented. As the need for
international cooperation intensifies, the disconnection between world
economy and national political institutions makes finding effective
solutions very difficult.

There is still a tendency to see the potential disaster we are living
through in economic rather than political terms. In this respect,
neoliberalism’s detractors often reproduce the free market ideology they
claim to oppose. The Euro is by no means the only symptom of this
crisis, but it may still come to be seen as the decisive nail in the
coffin of the world economy today. We need to ask not what is beginning,
but what is ending. This is not straightforward. What is ending is
‘national capitalism’, the synthesis of nation-states and industrial
capitalism.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_5] Its main symbol has been national monopoly currency
(legal tender policed by a central bank). It was the institutional
attempt to manage money, markets and accumulation through central
bureaucracy within a cultural community of national citizens. It was
never the only active principle in world political economy: cities,
regional federations, and empires are at least as old or much older.

People learn to understand each other as members of communities; they
share meanings as a way of achieving their practical purposes together.
Money is an important vehicle for this. Nation-states have been so
successful in a relatively short time that it is hard for us to imagine
society in any other way. Five different types of community came
together in the nation-state:

-   *political community*: a link to the world and a source of law at
    home;

-   *community of place*: territorial boundaries of land and sea;

-   *imagined or virtual community*: the constructed cultural identity
    of citizens;

-   *community of interest*: subjectively and objectively shared
    purposes in trade and war;

-   *monetary community*: common use of a national monopoly currency.

The rise and fall of single currencies is therefore one way of
approaching national capitalism’s historical trajectory. At present
national politics and media frame economic questions in such narrow
terms that we find it hard to think about the world as a whole. But
money is already global in scope and the need to overcome this
limitation is urgent.

## From Singular to Plural Monies

Mainstream economics says more about what money does than what it is.
Its main function is held to be as a *medium of exchange*, a more
efficient lubricant of markets than barter. Another school emphasizes
money’s function as a *means of payment*, especially of taxes to the
government and hence on ‘purchasing power’. It is also a *standard of
value* or unit of account, with the focus again on government’s role in
establishing the legal conditions for trade; while John Locke conceived
of money as a *store of wealth*, a new form of property that allowed the
accumulation of riches to escape from the limitations of natural
economy.

Karl Polanyi argued that only modern money combines the four functions
(payment, standard, store, and exchange) in a few ‘all-purpose’ symbols,
national currency.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_6] Although his analysis was intended just to
illuminate the history of money, Polanyi’s approach offers profound
insight into the causes of today’s global economic crisis. Our challenge
is to conceive of society once more as something plural rather than
singular, as a federated network rather than as a centralized hierarchy,
the nation-state. The era of national monopoly currencies is very recent
(from the 1850s); it took the United States, for example, half a century
to secure an uncontested monopoly for its ‘greenbacks’; and ‘all-purpose
money’ has been breaking up for four decades now, since the Dollar left
gold.

Since the end of the Bretton Woods system of fixed parity exchange
rates, world economy has reverted to the plural pattern of competing
currencies that was normal before central banks learned how to control
national economies in the late 19th century. One aspect of the present
crisis is that the international rule system imposed after World War II was subverted by the creation of an offshore banking system
which brought the informal economy to the heart of global finance.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_7]
The separation of functions between different types of monetary
instruments was also crucial to money’s great escape from the rules of
the Keynesian consensus. Central bank control has been eroded by a shift
to money being issued in multiple forms by a global distributed network
of corporations of many kinds, not just governments and banks.

Georg Simmel considered money’s twin anchors to be its physical
substance (coins, paper, etc.) and the social institutions supporting
the community of its users.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_8] He predicted that the first would wither
away, making the second more visible. Simmel’s prophecy has been
realized to a remarkable degree, as the digital revolution accelerates
and cheapens electronic transfers. But if the essence of money is its
use in a community with shared social institutions, globalization has
made national capitalism seem a lot less self-sufficient than it did a
century ago. Radical reductions in the cost of transferring information
have introduced new conditions for engagement with the impersonal
economy. The replacement of single currencies by numerous types of more
specialized monetary instruments is one inevitable result of this.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_9]

We must therefore move from singular (national) to plural (federal)
conceptions of society. The infrastructure of money has already become
decentralized and global, so a return to the national solutions of the
1930s or a Keynesian regime of managed exchange rates and capital flows
is bound to fail. But the extension of economy beyond national
boundaries is fraught with danger. We also need to extend systems of
social rights to the global level before the contradictions of the
market system collapse into world war – but local political organization
resists such a move. At the same time, ours is becoming a multi-polar
world marked by a variety of political forms and an income distribution
that is much less divergent than during the age of European imperialism.

## A Global Power Struggle

We are witnessing a global power struggle of awesome consequences and we
cannot afford to stand to one side. The parallels with 1914 are
striking. A global hegemon in decline, the United States (then Britain)
confronts a rising challenger, China (Germany), while some regional
powers are failing – Europe, Japan (Austria-Hungary, the Ottomans) – and
others flex their muscles, India, Russia, Brazil (U.S., France, Japan).
Money is at the heart of this struggle: the U.S. Dollar, currency wars,
BRICS vs. the Bretton Woods institutions; but conventional economics
does not help ordinary people to grasp what is going on. By studying
monetary relations on different geographical scales, from intimate
encounters to foreign exchange markets, we can help create new meanings
and connections between everyday life and the human predicament as a
whole.

Through the internet or phone network, we can now span the world and
connect personally with people whom we will never meet. Humanity has
universal media for the expression of universal ideas. Money is
essential to their dissemination. It is a constitutive part of our
multiple-layered identities, from the most intimate relations to
communities of exchange on a vast scale. Money allows us to express
ourselves and indexes our place in hierarchies, solidarities, and
enclosures. Our identities expand, fragment, and recombine as we move
from the most local transactions to national or regional currencies.
Central banks, insurance companies, pension funds, global and local
banks, savings clubs, and other local credit schemes, all shape the
possibilities for our personalities to develop. We learn about politics
and our membership of larger groups by participation in monetary
networks that exclude and entrap us even as they extend our horizons. As
Marcel Mauss knew, the idea of society itself is reshaped by this
multifarious expansion.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_10] If we hope for a more peaceful and
integrated world society, money will certainly play an important role in
its recovery from the present impasse.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_11]

The economy always has two faces, being pulled both inwards to secure
local guarantees of a community’s rights and interests and outwards to
engage with foreigners through the medium of money and markets of
various sorts – not just the sort we are familiar with. The idea of
world society is still perceived by most people as at best a utopian
fantasy or at worst a threat. We need to build an infrastructure of
money adequate to humanity’s common needs, although this agenda seems
impossibly remote right now. One move in this direction goes by the name
of ‘alter-globalization’ and the idea of a human economy offers a bridge
to that movement.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_12]

## Money in a Human Economy

At the University of Pretoria we have organized a research team to
develop a ‘human economy’ approach.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_13] Our first basic method is
inspired by the ethnographic revolution that launched social and
cultural anthropology in the 20th century. A class of academics chose to
break out of the ivory tower and join the people where they live in
order to discover what they do, think, and want. Second, the economy is
always plural and people’s experience of it across time and space has
more in common that the use of contrastive terms like ‘capitalism’ or
‘socialism’ would suggest. This approach addresses the variety of
particular institutions through which most people experience economic
life. Third, our aim is to promote economic democracy by helping people
to organize and improve their own lives. Our findings must therefore
ultimately be presented to the public in a spirit of pragmatism and made
understandable for readers’ own practical use.

All of this is compatible with a humanist view of the economy. It must
be so, if the economy is to be returned from remote experts to the
people who are most affected by it. But humanism by itself is not
enough. The human economy must also be informed by a vision capable of
bridging the gap between everyday life (what people know) and our common
predicament, which is inevitably impersonal and lies beyond the actor’s
point of view (what we don’t know). For this purpose a variety of
methods must be drawn from philosophy, world history, literature, and
grand social theory. Globalization is clearly reversible and we have to
extend our normal reach to address its contradictions. We urgently need
to make a world where all people can live together. Small may be
beautiful and a preference for initiatives grounded in local social
realities is unchallengeable, but large-scale bureaucracies, whether
governments, cities or business corporations, are also essential if our
aspirations for economic democracy are to embrace the movement of the
world we live in.

So a human economy approach must somehow bridge the gap between everyday
life and a world driven by forces that most people cannot imagine. But,
given our preference to anchor economic strategies in people’s everyday
lives, their aspirations and their local circumstances, the intellectual
movement involved should be conceived of as being one of *extension*
from the local towards the global. We can’t arrive instantly at a view
of the whole, but we can engage more concretely with the world that lies
beyond local society. According to Mauss and Polanyi (founders of modern
social theory too), the chief way of achieving social extension has
always been through money and markets in a variety of forms. Without
money, most people could not juggle the plethora of institutional
factors in their lives. Money and markets are intrinsic to our human
potential, not anti-human as they are often depicted. Of course they
should take forms that are more conducive to economic democracy. It
helps to recognize that money and markets span the extremes of infinite
expansion and finite closure. As Simmel said, money reflects our human
potential to make universal society.

The Human Economy idea may have its origins in small-scale informal
activities and a humanist ideology, but effective resistance to the
corporate takeover of world society will require selective alliances
between self-organized initiatives on the ground and large-scale
bureaucracies of the public and private kind. It will also require the
development of global social networks of the sort from which our human
economy program drew its impetus. The human predicament is impersonal;
there are powerful anti-humanist forces in our common lives. So we have
to build bridges between local actors and the new human universal, world
society. To be human is to be a person who depends on and must make
sense of impersonal social conditions. But in the struggle with the
corporations, we need to be very sure that we are human and they are
not. The drive for economic democracy will not be won until that
confusion has been cleared up.


## Heads or Tails Revisited

In my article ‘Heads or Tails? Two Sides of the Coin’, I argued
following Polanyi[^1_1-Hart_Keith_14] that money is both a *token* of state authority
and a *commodity* made by markets, at the same time an aspect of
relations between persons and a thing detached from persons.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_15] States
and markets are combined in national capitalism, but policy swings
erratically between the two extremes. David Graeber has made a similar
contrast between money as virtual credit and as currency or bullion to
analyze the history of debt over the last five millennia. If money is
the concrete symbol of our human potential to make universal society, we
will first have to get past national capitalism as the 20th century’s
dominant social form.

Money, much as Durkheim argued for religion,[^1_1-Hart_Keith_16] is the principal means
for us all to bridge the gap between everyday personal experience and a
society whose wider reaches are impersonal. It is often portrayed as a
lifeless object separated from persons, whereas it is a creation of
human beings, imbued with the collective spirit of the living and the
dead. Money, as a token of society, must be impersonal in order to
connect individuals to the universe of relations to which they belong.
But people make everything personal, including their relations with
society. This two-sided relationship is universal, but its incidence is
highly variable.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_17] Money in capitalist societies stands for
alienation, detachment, impersonal society, the outside; its origins lie
beyond our control (*the market*). Relations marked by the absence of
money are the model of personal integration and free association, of
what we take to be familiar, the inside (*home*). People want to
integrate division, to make some meaningful connection between their own
subjectivity and society as an object. It helps that money, as well as
being the means of separating public and domestic life, was always the
main bridge between the two. That is why money must be central to any
attempt to humanize society. It is both the principal source of our
vulnerability in society and the main practical symbol allowing each of
us to make an impersonal world meaningful.

The reality of markets is not just universal abstraction, but this
mutual determination of the abstract and the concrete. If you have some
money, there is almost no limit to what you can do with it, but, as soon
as you buy something, the act of payment lends concrete finality to your
choice. Money’s significance thus lies in the synthesis it promotes of
impersonal abstraction and personal meaning, objectification and
subjectivity, analytical reason and synthetic narrative. Its social
power comes from the fluency of its mediation between infinite potential
and finite determination. To turn our backs on markets and money in the
name of collective as opposed to individual interests reproduces by
negation the bourgeois separation of self and society. It is not enough
to emphasize the controls that people already impose on money and
exchange as part of their personal practice.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_18] That is the everyday
world as most of us know it. We also need ways of reaching the parts of
the macro-economy that we don’t know, if we wish to avert the ruin it
could bring down on us all.

It is, however, no longer obvious, as it was for Mauss, Polanyi, and
Keynes, where the levers of democratic power are to be located, since
the global explosion of money, markets, and telecommunications has
severely exposed the limitations of national frameworks of economic
management. Before long, a genuine revival of Keynesian redistributive
politics seems to be inevitable. But the imbalances of the money system
are now global.

Polanyi explained the world crisis of the mid-20th century as the
outcome of a previous round of what we would call ‘globalization’.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_19]
There are substantial parallels between the last three decades and a
similar period before 1914. In both cases, market forces were unleashed
within national societies, leading to rapid capital accumulation and an
intensification of economic inequality. Finance capital led the
internationalization of economic relations, and people migrated in large
numbers all over the world. Money seemed to be the dominant social force
in human affairs; and this could be attributed to its greater freedom of
movement as the boundaries of society were extended outward — then by new
means of transport and communication and colonial empire, now by the
digital revolution and transnational corporations. The main difference
is that the late 19th century was driven by a bureaucratic revolution
which led to the centralization of politics and production; whereas a
century later these same bureaucracies are being dismantled by a
neoliberalism powered by the digital revolution in communications.
Moreover, the immediate winner of ‘the second thirty years’ war’
(1914-1945) was a social democratic version of national capitalism, the
same system that has been unravelling for four decades now. Finally, the
United States’ overwhelming monopoly of the global means of destruction,
the supremacy of the dollar as world currency, and its corporations’
dominant supply of the hardware, software and content of the internet
economy suggest that its vulnerability today is somewhat less than
Britain’s a century ago.

Money opens up local societies to interdependence with foreigners, but
the pressure to reassert local control persists. Hence the internal and
external dimensions of economy are often in conflict. National
capitalism turned away from the world in an era of war and disruption of
trade into an aspiration to self-sufficiency whose symbol was national
currency. On a much smaller scale community currencies of the LETS type
reject money’s capacity to link us to universal society in favor of
local restrictions on exchange.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_20] Even Simmel believed that the
dematerialization of money would reveal to us our dependence on society
in the Durkheimian form of a singular state. All we know now is that the
economy is global and lawless, while national capitalism is in full
collapse. It would be no surprise if we are entering another age of war
and revolution, comparable to that of 1914-1945, the last time that
several decades of financial globalization ended.

We are not entitled, of course, to assume that neoliberalism is played
out.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_21] Neoliberal privatization and the invasion of money into public
and domestic life continue unabated. The penetration of finance into
everyday reproduction poses problems that should be addressed through
developing alternative approaches to money, not by denying its central
role in the organization of complex societies. The attempt to separate
spheres of paid and unpaid labor (‘the market’ vs. ‘home’) was always
unrealizable and is in any case negated by money’s indispensability to
both.

Money is a great equalizer, but it also fuels inequality. I have long
insisted that money is both personal and impersonal, subjective and
objective, analytical and synthetic: and this is related to its ability
to mediate the extremes of human experience. Money as memory links
individual and community, past, present and future, science and story,
local and global.[^1_1-Hart_Keith_22] We must resist the temptation to perch on one
pole of these paired categories, learning rather how to think
dialectically through them and to begin to work out practical ways of
combining them socially.

The two great memory banks are language and money. Anthropologists have
paid much attention to the first, which divides us more than it brings
us together, but not to money whose potential for universal
communication is less ambiguous, in addition to its well-advertised
ability to symbolize differences between us. Exchange of meanings
through language and of objects through money are now converging in a
single network of communication, the internet. We must learn how to use
this digital revolution to advance the human conversation about a better
world. Our political task is to make a world society fit for all
humanity. Money is how we learn to be truly human.

## A Note on Historical Periodization

Finally, I present a historical periodization of the last two centuries
or more, to show that the present rupture opens up the prospect of
several decades of turbulence. The current crisis is often compared with
the 1930s, but the Great Depression was part of a sequence launched when
three decades of financial globalization were interrupted by the
outbreak of war in 1914.

1776-1815            Age of war and revolutions

1815-1848            Industrial revolution

1848-1873            Origins of national capitalism

1873-1914            First age of financial globalization

1914-1945            Second age of war and revolutions

1945-1979            Golden age of national capitalism

1979-2008            Second age of financial globalization

2008- …                 Third age of war and revolutions?

This is not a prophecy that the outcome of the present global crisis
will be inevitably dire, but rather an invitation to public debate at a
more serious level than is usual which may help us to avoid or at least
prepare for such an outcome.

I have suggested here that the extension of society to a more inclusive
level has some positive features and, before we demonize money and
markets, we should try to turn them to institutional ends that benefit
us all. We need new principles of political association with which to
put in place more effective regulatory frameworks. This means addressing
squarely the new combinations of money, machines, and people emerging
today. In order for that to come about, however, we have to be weaned
from old social structures and habits of mind that have not yet been
fully destroyed, as they would be by a period of general war of the kind
that has accompanied all the major revolutions of modern history.

## References

Blanc, Jerome. ‘Community and Complementary Currencies’, in Keith Hart,
Jean-Louis Laville, and Antonio David Cattani (eds) *The Human Economy*,
Malden and Cambridge: Polity, 2010, pp. 303-312.

Dembinski, Paul H. and Christophe Perritaz. ‘Towards the Break-up of
Money. When Reality Driven by Information Technology Outshines Simmel’s
Vision’, *Foresight* 2.5 (2000): 483-97.

Durkheim, Emile. *The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life,* Glencoe,
IL: Free Press, 1965 (1912).

Graeber, David. *Debt: The First 5,000 Years*, New York: Melville House,
2011.

Hann, Chris and Keith Hart. *Economic Anthropology: History,
Ethnography, Critique*, Cambridge: Polity, 2011.

Hart, Keith. ‘Heads or Tails?
Two Sides of the Coin’, *Man* 3.21 (1986): 637-56.

Hart, Keith. *The Memory Bank:
Money in an Unequal World*, London: Profile, 2000.

Hart, Keith. ‘Money is Always Personal and Impersonal’, *Anthropology
Today* 23.5 (2007): 16-20.

Hart, Keith. ‘Money in the Making of World Society’, in Chris Hann and
Keith Hart (eds) *Market and Society*. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2009, pp. 91-105.

Hart, Keith. ‘Marcel Mauss’s Economic Vision, 1920-1925: Anthropology,
Politics, Journalism’, *Journal of Classical Sociology* 14.1 (2014):
34-44.

Hart, Keith, Jean-Louis Laville, and
Antonio Cattani (eds) *The Human Economy: A Citizen’s Guide*, Cambridge:
Polity, 2010.

Hart Keith and Horacio Ortiz. ‘The Anthropology of Money and Finance:
between Ethnography and World History’, *Annual Review of Anthropology*
43 (2014): 465-482.

Hegel, Gottfried Wilhelm Friederich. *The
Philosophy of Right*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1967 (1821).

Hobsbawm, Eric. *The Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century
1914-1991*, London: Little Brown, 1994.

Lewis, W. Arthur. *The Evolution of the International Economic Order*.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.

Locke, John. *Two Treatises of Politics*, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1960 (1690).

Mauss, Marcel. *Écrits politiques,* M Fournier (ed.) Paris: Fayard,
1997.

Mirowski, Philip. *Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste*, New York:
Verso, 2013.

Parry, Maurice and Jonathan Bloch (eds). *Money and the Morality of
Exchange*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Pleyers, Geoffrey. *Alter-Globalization:
Becoming Actors in A Global World*, Cambridge: Polity, 2010.

Polanyi, Karl. *The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic
Origins of Our Times*, Boston: Beacon, 2001 (1944).

Polanyi, Karl. ‘Money Objects and Money
Uses’, in *The Livelihood of Man. Studies in Social Discontinuity*, Karl
Polanyi (ed.) New York: Academic, 1977 (1964), pp. 97-121.

Shaxson, Nicholas. *Treasure Islands: Tax Havens and the Men Who Stole
the World*, New York: Vintage, 2011.

Simmel, Georg. *The Philosophy of Money*. London: Routledge, 1978
(1900).

Zelizer, Viviana A. *The Social Meaning of Money*, New York: Basic
Books, 1994.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_1]: W. Arthur Lewis, *The Evolution of the International Economic
    Order*, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_2]: Eric Hobsbawm, *The Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century
    1914-1991*, London: Little Brown, 1994.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_3]: Chris Hann and Keith Hart, *Economic Anthropology: History,
    Ethnography, Critique*, Cambridge: Polity, 2011.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_4]: Keith Hart, *The Memory Bank: Money in an Unequal World*, London:
    Profile, 2000.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_5]: Keith Hart, ‘Money in the Making of World Society’, in Chris Hann
    and Keith Hart (eds) *Market and Society*. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2009, pp. 91-105.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_6]: Karl Polanyi, ‘Money Objects and Money Uses’, in *The Livelihood
    of Man. Studies in Social Discontinuity*, New York: Academic, 1977
    (1964).

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_7]: Nicholas Shaxson, *Treasure Islands: Tax Havens and the Men Who
    Stole the World*, New York: Vintage, 2011.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_8]: Georg Simmel, *The Philosophy of Money*. London: Routledge, 1978
    (1900).

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_9]: Paul H. Dembinski and Christophe Perritaz, ‘Towards the Break-up
    of Money: When Reality Driven by Information Technology Outshines
    Simmel’s Vision’, *Foresight* 2.5 (2000): 483-97.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_10]: Marcel Mauss, *Écrits politiques,* M. Fournier (ed.) Paris:
    Fayard, 1997; Keith Hart, ‘Marcel Mauss’s Economic Vision,
    1920-1925: Anthropology, Politics, Journalism’, *Journal of
    Classical Sociology* 14.1 (2014): 34-44.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_11]: Keith Hart and Horacio Ortiz, ‘The Anthropology of Money and
    Finance: Between Ethnography and World History’, *Annual Review of
    Anthropology* 43 (2014): 465-482.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_12]: Geoffrey Pleyers, *Alter-Globalization: Becoming Actors in A
    Global World*, Cambridge: Polity, 2010.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_13]: See Keith Hart, Jean-Louis Laville, and Antonio Cattani (eds)
    *The Human Economy: A Citizen’s Guide*, Cambridge: Polity, 2010,
    [http://www.up.ac.za/human-economy-program/](http://www.up.ac.za/human-economy-program/),
    [http://thehumaneconomy.blogspot.com/](http://thehumaneconomy.blogspot.com/).

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_14]: Karl Polanyi, *The Great Transformation: The Political and
    Economic Origins of Our Times*, Boston: Beacon, 2001 (1944).

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_15]: Keith Hart, ‘Heads or Tails? Two Sides of the Coin’, *Man* 3.21
    (1986): 637-56.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_16]: Emile Durkheim, *The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life,*
    Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1965 (1912).

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_17]: Keith Hart, ‘Money is Always Personal and Impersonal’,
    *Anthropology Today* 23.5 (2007): 16-20.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_18]: Jonathan Parry and Maurice Bloch (eds) *Money and the Morality of
    Exchange*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989; Viviana A.
    Zelizer, *The Social Meaning of Money*, New York: Basic Books, 1994.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_19]: Polanyi, *The Great Transformation*.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_20]: Jerome Blanc, ‘Community and Complementary Currencies’, in Keith
    Hart, Jean-Louis Laville, and Antonio David Cattani (eds) *The Human
    Economy*, Malden and Cambridge: Polity, 2010, pp. 303-312.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_21]: Philip Mirowski, *Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste*, New
    York: Verso, 2013.

[^1_1-Hart_Keith_22]: Keith Hart, *The Memory Bank*.