---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Democratizing the Power of Finance: A Discussion About Robin Hood Asset Management Cooperative with founder Akseli Virtanen
Article-status: accepted
Author: Pekka Piironen, Akseli Virtanen
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  Pekka Piironen a Finnish economic and strategy theorist, known for his theory of thecollective pledge and biopolitics of firms. He is a founding member of Robin Hood AssetManagement Cooperative and the author of Economy of Insecurity.
Akseli Virtanen is a theorist of new political finance, born in Finland and currentlybased in Santa Cruz, California. He is the author of Arbitrary Power, Critique of BiopoliticalEconomy and the editor of n-1 Edições. He is a founding member of Robin HoodAsset Management Cooperative.
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Democratizing the Power of Finance: A Discussion About Robin Hood Asset Management Cooperative with founder Akseli Virtanen

### Pekka Piironen and Akseli Virtanen {.author}

**Pekka Piironen:** What is Robin Hood?

**Akseli Virtanen:** Robin Hood is an asset management cooperative
established in June 2012. It is a counter-investment bank of the
precariat, which rethinks the means of finance and financial services.
We bend the financialization of economy to our benefit. Robin Hood has
the power and imagination to do this.

**Pekka**: How does it work?

**Akseli:** We operate a massive dynamic data-mining algorithm – we call
it the ‘Parasite’ – which logs into the brains of the bankers on Wall
Street, and they don’t even know it. We know exactly what they do and
when. We know who can make money consistently with certain instruments
and who cannot. Robin Hood is our means to share this knowledge. In the
first year, the value of our portfolio rose 30.74%. With this result we
were the third best hedge fund in the world. Now, after the second year,
we are up 40.15%.

**Pekka:** Some time ago the biggest Nordic newspaper headlined ‘Robin
Hood robs from the financial elite. Asset management for those without
assets.’ Is the mysterious Robin Hood Co-op an investment club, art, or
philosophy?

**Akseli:** Asset management for those without assets is quite a good
headline. We talk about minor asset management. That’s our business.

‘Minor’ originates from Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s conceptual
toolbox. They took it from Kafka’s diaries, where he talks about authors
writing in major languages who were able to transform their work into
something else, by making the work crumble and stammer, by operating in
the tissues and edges, from within, through the same language, but
turning it into something else, making it their own. It is an attempt to
think about political means, means of change, where there is no outside.
Minor is something that always brings together the personal and
political. It is always about making our existential territories more
habitable. And it is always something collectively produced. It changes
power relations by changing the conditions of the situation. It allows
for ‘a people to come’ by opening new routes and processes of becoming.

Robin Hood practices a special way of managing assets that makes
something new possible in a situation when nothing new seems possible.
It is a becoming. This is our invention. At the same time it is also
management of the assets of minorities, in Kafka’s sense, who will and
can never become major, but will always remain like spit in the salad.
And it is this management of minor assets, small assets, that is our other
particularity. A lot of small assets working together. We don’t mind the
connotation of being underage – not legally responsible, a minor, in a
process of still becoming – neither as an attribute to our way of
managing assets or to the assets managed, there is something true there.

‘Investment club’ is also an exciting choice of words; I don’t exactly
know what it means. We are a normal Finnish company operating under
Finnish law. The form of the company is a cooperative. And we are in the
middle of establishing the American Robin Hood in Silicon Valley.

We certainly embody a philosophy – especially in so far as we can think
that the task of philosophy is to create new concepts or new little
machines which correspond to real problems – but politics might be
more understandable in terms of our context, starting points, and
aims. Is Robin Hood business, art, or politics? This is an interesting
starting point for any discussion.

**Pekka:** Why the name Robin Hood?

**Akseli:** Everybody knows what Robin Hood does. In the age of semiotic
inflation and information overload, we don’t want to spend too much time
explaining. You need to get it in a different, immediate way.

The roots of Robin Hood are in the British Forest Law, which allowed
Norman kings to add more and more common forest areas under their
ownership. Villages, houses, fields, and even churches were destroyed to
add new land to king’s forests. Inhabitants of those areas were thrown
out without food, resources, opportunities, or prospects. They had very
limited options for survival, some caved, some became informers, conmen,
traitors, and other forms of opportunists. The local officers became
corrupted by providing their services to those who could pay. And the
punishments were severe: Robin Hood got the death penalty for poaching
the king’s deer in Sherwood.

**Pekka:** In a sense not that different from the situation today?

**Akseli:** Now, six hundred years later, we see new ‘Forest Laws’ to be
enforced everywhere, and the common is again under threat. We need
the financial services of Robin Hood, our methods are just a little
different due to the changed circumstances: now we follow all
transactions at the U.S. stock exchanges, make databanks of market
actors, deconstruct them from individuals into dividuals to extract
their most important knowledge and capabilities, and to put them to work
for us. But the consequences are the same: the Sheriffs of Nottingham
are clueless when they can’t withhold the king’s deer, or guard the
routes of the wealth expropriated from the people. Robin Hood’s business
is [minor asset
management.](http://www.robinhoodcoop.org/pages/democratization-of-finance-an-interview)
It means sharing and democratizing the power of finance. This is now off
limits to us.

**Pekka:** You have talked about Robin Hood as a parasite of financial
economy, providing access to money that is not tied to the necessity to
work.

**Akseli:** First of all, parasite is a concept of Michel Serres. What
is important here is what it tells of the relationship we have with the
financial market and its players. We let them do all the work and just
imitate them. Why? Because, as Serres writes, the one who plays the
position will always beat the one who does the content. The latter is
simple and naïve, the former complex and intelligent. By playing the
position we dominate the relationship. It means that we have a
relationship with the relationship itself. It is the meaning of the
prefix ‘para’ in the word parasite: to be on the side, not on the thing,
but on the relationship. A parasite has relationships; it makes a system
out of them.

Secondly, today there is an asymmetrical division between those who are
able to create money by transforming it into financial capital (to earn
money as separate income without a necessity to work) and those whose
only access to money is to work, possibly at any cost and condition – or
first take on debt, and then work. And furthermore, these two forms of
money, the money you get for doing work (money as means of payment,
money as means of exchange), and money as capital, have very different
powers. Or more precisely, the former has no power at all, it is money
castrated of any power, while the latter has a power to organize and
command the future, to reduce and submit what will be (all potentiality,
change) into what is now (existing power relationships). It represents
nothing; it has no equivalent, except in future exploitation of labor,
nature, and society.

Robin Hood challenges this debt mechanism of control and of limiting our
future. We also offer this other group of people a possibility of
income, which is not tied to the necessity of work. An access to money
as capital. It is a very concrete opening of the field of possibility.
It is an element of independence. That is why we can talk about
democratization of finance or of profanation of finance. By taking
something sacred, which we are not allowed to touch or which only the
priests can touch and understand – just think about the economy, the
financial market and its priests today – we are returning it to common use
and play.

**Pekka:** Robin Hood has been described as a ‘freak in the world of
banking’, established by a group of professors in economics and the arts
who work at the Finnish Aalto University.

**Akseli:** This is true, even if the professors were maybe not the
majority in this group. The founding members of the cooperative were:
Tero Nauha, Karolina Kucia, Liisa Välikangas, Heidi Fast, Kari
Yli-Annala, Jan Ritsema, Sakari Virkki, Teemu Mäki, Ana Fradique, Lauri
Kananoja, Valentina Desideri, Pekka Piironen, and Akseli Virtanen. There
were years of preparation and building of momentum before this. On the
board at the moment are Jan Ritsema, Tere Vaden, Liisa Välikangas and
Tiziana Terranova, and myself. We have over three hundred members from
fifteen different countries and are about to move to the next level of
the operation.

**Pekka:** You have talked about Robin Hood also as a ‘hedge fund of the
precariat’.

**Akseli:** Our aim is to bend the financialization of economy to the
benefit of those who have thus far been paying its costs: workers at the
mercy of the precarization, suffering from the insecurity of labor
markets and social rights, growing indebtedness, decreasing price of
labor, and of the downsizing of the welfare state. That states quite
clearly the relationship of our starting points. Disinflation is the
monetary relationship of the financialization of capital and
precarization of work. We see this now very clearly in Europe. How is it
possible for these deficits to exist without any inflation? Because the
logic has changed, the logic of derivatives has provided a means to
manufacture liquidity, which does not devalue the base currency. At the
moment our collective capacity to assume debt and pay taxes and be the
direct bearer of austerity measures – for governments to downsize and spend
less for one simple reason, to be able to borrow more – creates direct
vehicles for financial asset accumulation (which is not investment in
expanding production). The increasing supply of government bonds (safe
means for capital preservation) is possible only through deficit cuts
and excluding all inflationary spending. This is like the financial
equivalent of raw material for industrial production, like Robert
Meister has said so well. In the financial economy the surplus is
extracted more directly from this collective capacity to become more
indebted and pay taxes than from the stagnating number of people
employed to goods and services production. Today the growth in the forms
of indebtedness is the condition for capital accumulation, just like
expansion of labor force participation was for expanding commodity
production.

In this situation, Robin Hood operates exactly like the hedge funds and
not like a ‘retail fund’ of a bank. Robin Hood owns stock in other
companies as the only asset, and operates with greater flexibility than
banks. The investments of members are open ended and withdrawals are
allowed only at certain moments of the fiscal year. The value is
calculated as a share of the Net Asset Value (NAV), meaning that the
increases and decreases in the value of a cooperative’s investment
assets and expenses are directly reflected in the amount a member can
later withdraw. This is exactly what hedge funds do too, but what Robin
Hood hedges, is precarity: we take a position in the financial market to
offset and balance risk adopted by assuming a position at a contrary
market, the precarious labor market, where so far people have just been
paying the bills of financialization by letting it use our capability to
assume debt, pay taxes and worsen social rights as the main raw material
for accumulation of financial assets.

Robin Hood’s asset management is based on the idea at the origin of the
derivative market: it is possible to produce new assets by means of
hedging existing ones. Finance is essentially a technology to create
spreads – through creation of doubts, uncertainty, volatility, constant
threat of illiquidity – that are valued and can be arbitraged. Robin
Hood is using in quite an intelligent way the same new capitalist
financial alchemy of turning uncertainty into rent.

**Pekka:** By this you mean the Parasite algorithm, which takes
advantage of the spreads and volatilities of the stock markets?

**Akseli:** From the beginning we said that we are utilizing the
inefficiency of the financial market and our understanding of how public
opinion, or market sentiment, organizes the multitude of actors at the
market. We do big data. The Parasite, which Sakari has designed and
developed, follows all the transactions at the U.S. stock markets,
identifies the spreads, the best actors, follows their swarming – and
then imitates the emerging consensus action of the financial oligarchy.
Quite simply, the assets of the cooperative are invested at the market
by following and imitating the emerging consensus action, or swarming,
of the world’s best investors on each particular stock.

Our Italian friends Christian Marazzi, Carlo Vercellone, Andrea
Fumagalli, and Stefano Lucarelli have been writing about how money in
its finance form escapes the public control, the control of monetary
institutions like central banks, and becomes a prisoner of the
conventions of the oligarchy of the financial market. Robin Hood works
with the emergence and exploitation of the conventions of the oligarchy
on the market: we tax them for exploiting our collective ability to pay
taxes, bear austerity measures and become more indebted. Andrea and
Stefano are absolutely right when they say that the governance of the
conventions is the proxy of the expropriation of the common. We tax
this expropriation.

The hypothesis of the efficient market is, by the way, one of the most
important truths of the current economic policies. Our operation is
based on a completely different understanding of how the market works
and what the mechanisms of creating economic value today are, for
example: the role of flock behavior, origin of imitation, and means of
controlling a swarm in this.

**Pekka:** Some people would say you are just following a computer
program.

**Akseli:** It is funny when the Parasite and Robin Hood are interpreted
like this. We are dealing here with a little bit more than ‘a computer
program’. For example, the whole Polemos book series we did in early 2000
in Finland was created for building this understanding and organization.
These are wonderful books, 14 altogether, published in this series, from
the best economic and political thinkers at the moment. For example,
Christian Marazzi’s *Language and Capital*, Maurizio Lazzarato’s
*Revolutions of Capitalism*, Paolo Virno’s *Grammar of Multitude*,
Franco Berardi’s *Info-Labour and Precarious States of Mind*, Bracha
Ettinger’s *Co-Poiesis*, Félix Guattari’s *Chaosmosis and Three
Ecologies*, also your book *Economy of Insecurity*, my book *Critique of
Biopolitical Economy* and the famous *Dictionary of New Work* which was
based on a long lecture series we organized at the School of Economics.
It is important to understand that the Parasite coded by Sakari is the
essential part of the operation, but what is really important is the
approach behind it, that is, the understanding of the changed nature of
creation of value. That is why we are now capable of coming up with new
products too. I don’t know how I could emphasize this more. It sounds so
funny, when somebody just says that here are these dudes investing based
on a program – I mean after all the research and intellectual
investment, years of theoretical and experimental work we have put into
this. And there is the massive empirical testing of the Parasite carried
out over six years 2003-2009 at the U.S. stock markets, and even more
importantly, Sakari’s research work on the algorithmic production and
product development with the Parasite has been actually going on for
more than 20 years. Robin Hood has not just dropped from the heavens.

**Pekka:** Robin Hood has been in operation for two years. The co-op
opened an office in June 2014 in Stuttgart, and then one in Berlin and
Dublin.

**Akseli:** The ‘office’ is a work form that suits us. We can set it up
in any space, in a café, a museum, a park, a university. We call it an
office, a temporary office, where we work like one does in the
office… or how we imagine one works in the office…usually on particular
themes like aesthetics of algorithmic production, rethinking financial
services, crypto currency and equity, processes of the production of the
common and some legal issues depending on what is on our immediate agenda.
But the office is open and anybody is welcome to listen or join us in
the work.

It is hard to get our people to the same place and time as everybody is
so ‘busy’ and production has become spatially boundless and temporally
endless. And the offices are not gardens of Zen, but full of conflicts
and uneasy moments. It is very hard to work together. And we require
that the organizers put their ass on the line too, open their networks,
help us meet key people who could be interested in Robin Hood, of
cultural institutions (funds, museums, galleries), and from networks of
real finance money, funds, wealthy individuals and artists, angel
investors interested in production of common fare, disruptive financial
services, impact investments, venture philanthropy. We don’t organize to
run Robin Hood, we run Robin Hood to organize.

**Pekka:** You draw an international audience: artists, activists,
philosophers, and professors. I saw the images of the Stuttgart office
and it was full of diagrams and words like ‘aesthetics of algorithmic
production’, ‘subjective growth’, ‘dividual’, ‘exhaustion of possible’,
‘machinic surplus value’, ‘common-fare’, ‘relations’. Some radical
philosophers like Foucault, Deleuze and Guattari were dropped in the
stream of the discussion as easily as I used to smoke Marlboroughs.

**Akseli:** We are researchers of economy and organization. Already
during the mid 1990s we found out that it would not be a picnic when we
started using thinkers like Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, Gilles
Deleuze, Félix Guattari, and then the Italian post-operaist writers to
study and understand economy instead of the mainstream economic and
business theorists. Yet, without caring too much about the consequences, we
continued with the work because we knew that we were right – that this
was the right way if we wanted to really understand how economy and its
organization works today. So with these thinkers we were able to
understand, for example, how signs and meanings are part of real
production and not only some kind ideology or superstructure of
production; how the use of language can have real effects; how the
dynamic of the production of value is in the organization of a
heterogeneity, of heterogeneous forces, and not only in the relationship
between capital and labor; and how it is possible to control not only
actual but potential action and thought. With them we also understood
the blurring of the boundaries between economy and politics and how the
paradoxes of immaterial production – for example, that relations have
weight and the immaterial matters – cause problems to old approaches and
distinctions, and that we need new concepts and methods if we want to
understand what is going on. Some of the key issues of the production
value in economy today, like how to create a public, get its attention, keep and modulate it, have already been thought through quite precisely in
classical philosophy, rhetoric, and dramaturgy, in semiotics and
linguistic theory.

**Pekka:** As Robin Hood is connected to the ideas of basic income, is
Robin Hood trying to overturn capitalism through the stock exchange?

**Akseli:** Yes, the arguments for basic income are, in fact, quite
similar. Our methods are just taken a little further. But
‘overturning’ belongs to the political means of the last century and not
those of Robin Hood. What is important for understanding Robin Hood is
to understand why the old political means of building independent life
do not work anymore and why we need to invent something new.

The algorithmic and machinic functioning of economy today operates with
component parts of subjectivity; with its sensations, cognition, memory,
physical force, intelligence, affects, not-yet-individuated
potentialities. Their synthesis does not lie in the person but in the
machinic assemblage. What the person ‘wants’ or ‘wills’ is absolutely
irrelevant. And we see this so clearly: no matter what we say, vote,
demonstrate, argue, occupy, strike…nothing changes. The new mechanisms
of value production do not work with individual subjects, but with their
deterritorialization into dividuals. And that level does not involve
representation or consciousness, it does not operate through repression
or ideology, it takes us from the behind, from the inside, and from the
outside.

Our conclusion has been that also we need to start operating beyond
persuasion, beyond communication, taking the game outside of identities
and ‘self’ and towards dividuals, incremental desire, and imitation,
information deficit and fundamental distrust. The game of becoming a
member of Robin Hood is played here and not at the rational-cognitive
level. We need to take advantage of the ongoing deterritorialization and
move towards politics of dividualism and not try to return to a ‘subject
of interest’ or rely on programmatic politics of ‘cognitive persuasion’
or fall back on mythical-conscious narratives of the ‘worker’,
‘employment’, ‘welfare’, etc. It means engaging financial capital where
it draws its power: in its paradoxes, in its arbitrariness, in its
dividualism and not on rational decision-making and market-based
organization – they are not the problem here.

**Pekka:** Could you elaborate on what Robin Hood’s relationship with
art is?

**Akseli:** We use art to camouflage, but more importantly to produce
aesthetic surplus value, by trying to engage directly with art’s power
to create unforeseen and unthinkable (economic, political, social,
emotional, organizational…) processes. It is also interesting to ask,
like Florin Flueras and Alina Popa have said many times, what does Robin
Hood do to art? It is non-representative, non-visual, non-performative,
non-conceptual and it does not operate within the safe environment and
castrated power space of ‘Art’. Rather it uses art as an essential part
of social organization, economy, politics and life – like art was used
before it became something separate with its own axiological reference
system, you know, in ‘primitive’ societies where for example dance,
sound, plastic forms, signs on the body, ground and objects were
essential part of the political organization, rituals, religious
processes. From our perspective this is just pragmatics: we don’t give a
shit if Robin Hood is art or politics or business, we are interested in
what we can do with it; what are its effects, does it make our
existential territory more habitable or not?

**Pekka:** Robin Hood was originally a project in the Future Art Base
coordinated by you for the university. The School of Arts presented it
as a university level top priority strategic initiative in October 2012.
But after information on Robin Hood reached the highest management of
the university, you were told that the financing for the whole Future
Art Base would be terminated immediately. They said ‘Robin Hood is
potentially dangerous to the reputation of the university’.

**Akseli:** It was a surprise that they did what they did – quite simply
we were just fired – without even trying to find out what this project
was about. Or I don’t know, was it surprising at all? More likely we
were just naïve to think that something like this could be done there, it still makes me blush. It is an extremely conservative
environment where no risks are taken. For them it was a hygienic
preemptive action. I want to say this because we had prepared Robin Hood
very carefully together with lawyers; we knew that there was nothing
‘illegal’ about it.

**Pekka:** You have said Robin Hood is ‘is unallowable, impossible and
disgusting… a monster… but it corresponds to our subjectivity’. What is
this subjectivity?

**Akseli:** There is no heroism in the exhaustion and disillusionment we
are experiencing. We have elsewhere described ourselves as a group of
losers, sad figures, dark souls, cynical opportunists, and depressed
princesses. We are not tough or macho, we are soft and wet, impotent and
feeble. We don’t march or demonstrate. We have difficulty in getting
out of the bed. We need each other just for trying to stand up. We are
‘molle’ people,[^1] the future of cooperation. This skepticism is not
cognitive but ethical. The impasse is ethical and political at once; it
affects our position, our exploration of the world. It is the dead end
of politics as we have known it, which is the breeding ground of Robin
Hood. Robin Hood is belief in this world, and not in some other.

**Pekka:** The art audience at Documenta found it difficult to stomach the
performance by such merry men and women of Robin Hood.

**Akseli:** It was a fairly elaborate installation or performance, whose
form was a paradox. A lot has been written about it, but I can say it
again: Robin Hood is an attempt to think about the possibility of
cooperation in a condition where it seems that distrust, suspicion, and
exploitation of others has become the most important means of our
survival. We have talked about these as the precarious states of mind.
What does a cooperation of opportunists look like? How does a community
of depressed people function? Or cooperation in a situation where we are
exhausted by the fact that we need to put all our thoughts, feelings,
tastes and relationships to work all the time in every short-term
project we get. These states of mind are organic parts of the way in
which the economy works. Economy has become a production of
subjectivity. Here is also the reason why the old political means – like
solidarity, creation of a collective conscious subjectivity, creation of
your own values – are not operational anymore and we need to create new
forms, paradoxes, monsters which don’t fit to the normal flow of thought
and action and may seem disgusting, especially from the perspective of
the old morality of the left.

**Pekka:** The artistic director of Documenta 13 accused you of
concentrating only on money?

**Akseli:** Carolyn Christov-Bagargiev, who I really admire and like,
perhaps got a little irritated in the end and raised her voice to ask us
why we only think about money while the entire Documenta 13, for
example, was made with love! Well, with love and €29 million we might
add… but she said that money does not exist, only love. She meant that,
essentially, it was not money that made Documenta happen, but love from
which in turn, artworks emerged. And the entire big art audience nodded
and hummed as a sign of consensus. We answered that we know the
situation very well, because we work and produce everything all the time
only with love too – and it is exactly this, which exhausts us. Robin
Hood offers affective rest in this situation. This affective rest – that
the members do not need to put all their abilities and skills and
relationships to work, to bond, to create a community etc. – with still
a possibility of income, is the core of Robin Hood. Just give your
money, we will make it work and give you back more, and you can do what
ever you want. You can save your love. We are a love bank. Documenta 13
crystallized it almost perfectly.

**Pekka:** The profit made by Robin Hood is distributed amongst its
members, who have the possibility of either keeping the whole amount or
giving a part of it to the common pool of the co-op.

**Akseli:** That’s right.

**Pekka:** So far, the investments by Robin Hood have been doing well.

**Akseli:** In this business nothing but the results matter. We have
been able to create a start-up that financed itself already during its
first year by income funding, that is pretty rare. And during the second
year, we multiplied our assets under management tenfold. This is just a
beginning; you haven’t yet seen anything of what we can really do. We
are preparing for some serious kick-ass operations to start taking
place.

**Pekka:** Many newspaper reporters have asked about a proof of
existence of the portfolio.

**Akseli:** This is a very interesting question. How can we be certain
that the Robin Hood portfolio exists? How can you be certain of the
value of something? Because this is what they are really asking: does
Robin Hood really exist, does its portfolio exist, and how can they be
certain of that? And then we have provided formal documents, company
registry papers, an auditing report of the accounting by Ernst & Young,
our portfolio report by Interactive Brokers which is one of the most
respected brokerage houses in the world. I don’t know what else we could
do. I don’t know if they are as thorough when they go to a normal bank,
what kind of evidence they ask to believe that this or that fund offered
by the bank really exists? I wonder how those banks would answer if
asked ‘do you really exist, does this fund really exist?’

How can we be certain that a portfolio of any investment bank really exists?
That it has value? Of what is this value made? You must trust. Think
about the Bernie Madoff affair for example, the largest financial fraud
in U.S. history, how long he was able to carry on his investment scam,
just because he was the ex-chairman of NASDAQ. The big banks spend
billions to appear trustworthy and seduce people to trust them. On
average banks have 20 to 30 sales people per one analyst. That is their
real business. And do you think we should trust them? I mean, after all
we know, that they cheat, con, exploit clients for their own profit,
manipulate European level interest rates, the incredible bonus systems.
How is trust created? This is the question at core of Robin Hood. Unlike
the normal banks and investment houses, we are fully transparent and not
afraid of this question. How is value actually made? And this is also
why the clergy tries to refuse our entrance to the temple, so that the
emperors without clothes will not be revealed.

This is what the priests repeat: you philosophers and artists and
temporary workers, you have no access, to the temple, you don’t
understand, you cannot come here, you cannot touch this, you must let us
deal with this. The funniest thing of course is, that Robin Hood has
been able to create something that this clergy will not understand. This
is also our best protection.

We have the power and imagination to invent the new financial
instruments and services that we need.

**Pekka:** Robin Hood also invests in oil, weapons industry, and other
companies that traditionally might be considered to be evil.

**Akseli:** Yes, we do.

**Pekka:** What is the ethics of this?

**Akseli:** We place our tax on all instruments in which we see the
financial oligarchy move. It is a shameless ethic, a scandalous ethic,
which binds itself directly into politics. It is an ethical order that
perhaps goes beyond the Greek and Christian traditions of ethics, a
post-ethical ethics and post-political politics that corresponds to our
subjectivity and situation.

Robin Hood is not a moralistic organization. It is not an organization
of the ‘good’. We make no promises of the ‘good’ around which we would
organize. And we are trying to not be an ethical organization either.
Production of ethics – of the conditions and environments of our action
and thought, of the habits and rules that we follow as our ‘second
nature’ as Aristotle put it – has become an important method to exhaust
the potentiality of our action. We are trying to break out of this form
of control. Our ethics are about reopening the field of the possible.

So Robin Hood ethics are about being able to take action upon oneself and
others. An ethical subject is a subject that is capable of taking risks,
posing a challenge, introducing conflict and division into community,
and of governing oneself and others in a situation of conflict. Our
ethics have to do much more with combat and politics, than with being
nice and responsible, doing what is accepted, staying in a place
assigned to you. The ethics of Robin Hood do not include such aspects.
It is an ethics closer to a poetic notion, as our philosopher friend Juha Varto
has beautifully said.

A poetic stance takes place in active doing, being in operation, not
stopping to reflect. It is a warrior’s stance that has no individual or
personal or collective message to fight for but a profession of a simple
existential pragmatic that gives meaning to all there is to do.
Poetic stance is an ethic-free, moral-free territory where
experimentation is the only guiding principle. Anything may be expected
from us. There is no criterion for good or bad since there is no solid
context to which such an evaluation could refer.

Today poetic stances belongs to people who are active without a cause
and without a need to legitimize their every step in order to be able to
take the next one. It includes the idea that steps cannot be separated
if one is in the middle of what is happening, just like the motion in
Zeno’s paradox, where the arrow is motionless at every separate point of
its trajectory and seems to annul the reality of motion and change for
anyone ends up in communication and the power of meaningful language
ridiculed by the sophist. Poetic means being in the middle, it leads
towards a change, a region, which is not controlled by, determined space
and time. This is where ethics begins. Ethics is a question about the
possibility of the future.

**Pekka:** Does it mean that Robin Hood is trying to beat the enemy by
joining them?

**Akseli**: We are trying to find a way forward from the
financialization of economy. There is no way for some kind of return;
our money is already there. Every time you use your credit card you take
part in the creation of finance. As soon as your money hits your
account, the banks start to use it for expanding credit. Your retirement
money is working day and night at the market. And money does not obey
boundaries like ‘good’ and ‘bad’, you cannot tell it to stay in one
place, like in the stock of a ‘nice company’ and not to go somewhere
else. Money does not function like that. There are no financial virgins.

And even more importantly, our individual and collective capability to
assume debt and pay taxes is the main raw material for the accumulation
of financial assets at the moment; it is the base for the continuous
supply of safe collateral for capital that allows riskier credit, like
derivatives, to be priced. The size of the derivative market has grown
in the past 30 years to become over 20 times bigger than entire world
Gross National Product. And at the same time the number of banks has
decreased by 40%. Only nine big investment banks actually control almost
the entire derivative market. This has nothing to do with free
competition or ‘may the best win’. During the first three months of 2014
alone the net earnings of Goldman Sachs was over 2.02 billion dollars,
HSBC 5.1 billion dollars, JP Morgan 5.3 billion dollars...in three
months! It is quite a lucrative business. And our money, for example in
retirement funds, is there too. We never see the profits. We just carry
the risks. Our individual and collective capability to assume debt, pay
taxes and bear the austerity measures is used directly as raw material
for making these profits. We are the wild side of finance.

[^1]: The soft belly - *il ventre molle* - of Infosphere is a concept by
    Franco Berardi. He developed it to think about the place of
    insurrection and mutation when controls have become arbitrary and
    start to operate through linguistic and technological automatisms,
    which predispose our aptitudes, tendencies and positions at a
    dividual level. It is no use to rebel or demonstrate against them,
    it means nothing to their functionality. Yet their weak spot is in
    the softness or unpredictability of social sensibility and
    unconsciousness. It is their ‘soft belly’.
