---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: Lena Rethel and Irwan Abdalloh
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  Lena Rethel is Associate Professor of International Political Economy at the Universityof Warwick, working on financial development and Islamic finance. Her publicationsinclude The Problem with Banks (Zed Books, 2012; with Timothy J. Sinclair) and TheEveryday Political Economy of Southeast Asia (Cambridge University Press, 2015; withJuanita Elias).
Irwan Abdalloh is the head of Islamic Capital Market Development at the IndonesiaStock Exchange (IDX). He is a lecturer in Islamic Investment in the PostgraduateProgram of the University of Indonesia and at the Tazkia University College of IslamicEconomics. He is the founder of icmspecialist.com.
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Inculcating Ethical Behaviour in Market Transactions? The Case of the Sharia Online Trading System in Indonesia

### Lena Rethel and Irwan Abdalloh {.author}

In the wake of the global financial crisis of 2007-9,[^1] the search is
on for finding alternatives to a global financial system whose flaws
have been thoroughly exposed, both in terms of its proneness to crisis
and its highly uneven – if not unjust – economic and social impact.
Commentators have identified a whole plethora of financial products – an
alphabet soup of CDOs, CDS, etc. – as highly implicated in the crisis
and coined terms such as ‘toxic assets’ and ‘financial weapons of mass
destruction’ for these products. Islamic finance is one of the
alternatives that has been put forward in post-crisis debates. It is a
fast expanding segment of international financial markets with annual
growth rates estimated to range from 15 to 20 percent. Deriving its core
principles from the jurisprudential body of knowledge known as the
Sharia, Islamic finance has distinct notions about debt,
creditworthiness and the relationship between the ‘financial’ and the
‘real’ economy. Its advocates suggest that Islamic finance draws on
religious values to promote a (more) ethical approach to finance that is
at the same time transaction-friendly. It joins the ranks of other
investment approaches proclaimed to be ‘more ethical’ such as socially
responsible finance, green financing or financing for development.
However, unlike other proposals for a more ethical finance, Islamic
finance clearly sees the transaction element of finance within its
ethical remit. The Sharia Online Trading System promoted by the
Indonesia Stock Exchange and discussed here is a case in point.

## Islamic Finance, Markets and Ethics

The global financial crisis of 2007-9 once more brought the questionable
ethics of international financial markets to the fore. Pundits variously
traced the causes of the crisis back to ‘a giant ponzi scheme’, high
street banks losing ‘their moral compass’ or the ‘flexible ethics’ of
investment bankers. As a whole, the financial services industry –
despite being in many countries one of the most heavily regulated
business sectors – struggles to come to terms with persistent problems
of conflicts of interest, often to the disadvantage of smaller, less
sophisticated (too often that is less well connected) market
participants.[^2] Yet, despite questions of ethics going to the heart of
financial market practice, precisely such questions are often side-lined
in economic analyses. Indeed, as the study of economic social relations
and dynamics has moved from the Moral Economy approaches of the 18th
century (think Adam Smith) to the Political Economy approaches of the
19th century (think David Ricardo) and then on to the 20th century
disciplinary subject of Economics (think post-marginal revolution),
markets have increasingly become conceptualised as *ethics free zones*,
subject only to the coordinating function of the price mechanism,
somehow arrived at through the intersection of demand and supply.[^3]

In so doing, the always-embeddedness of markets – including those for
capital – in social, cultural and even gendered relations is erased.[^4]
Rather than being reflective of the social reality of markets, this is
very much an analytical (and often political) choice. Nevertheless,
contesting the absence (of an explicit articulation) of the ethical and
social dimensions of financial markets is a key theme pervading the more
critically inclined political economy and social studies of finance
literatures. Here, financial markets are not conceptualized as natural
phenomena – that is abstract rational entities that follow objective,
scientific principles – but as the result of historical contingencies,
political contestation and the emergence of shared understandings which
condition, and are conditioned by, financial practices.[^5] Its explicit
claims to constitute a (more) ethical approach to finance, makes Islamic
finance an interesting test case to explore.

The advent of fully-fledged interest-based financial systems played a
significant role in the emergence and expansion of the modern economy.
In so doing, the acceptance of receiving and paying interest as
legitimate economic practice was part of the transformation of European
social epistemologies in the transition from medieval economic and
political systems to modernity.[^6] Like medieval Christian economic
thought, Islamic finance forbids interest. Nevertheless, in its current
guise Islamic finance is a distinctively modern phenomenon. Local
Islamic savings schemes emerged in a number of former British colonies
after independence in the 1950s and 1960s.[^7] Private Islamic banks
were established in the Middle East following the increase in oil prices
in the early 1970s.[^8] Other parts of the world followed swiftly. As a
consequence, over the last thirty years, Islamic finance has made
considerable inroads in both Muslim and non-Muslim societies. It has
spread to more than 75 countries and – by current estimates – has
achieved a global market size of more than 1trillion U.S. dollars in
assets.[^9] Moreover, not only has the number of specialist Islamic
financial institutions proliferated, but major international banks such
a HSBC and Standard Chartered Bank have launched Islamic subsidiaries.

What are the foundations of Islamic finance’s claim to constituting a
(more) ethical approach to finance? What constitutes its core
principles? To begin, Islamic finance seeks to install a financial order
that complies with the religious teachings of the Quran, the Sunnah and
the Hadith.[^10] Interest – or *riba* (literally: increase; generally
interpreted as the paying and receiving of interest) – constitutes what
Bill Maurer calls ‘the absent center of [Islamic finance] today’.[^11]
The prohibition of riba can be found in the Quran. For example, the
Surah Al-Baqarah sets out a number of principles with regard to charity
and money-lending. Lending is not considered a legitimately profitable
activity. According to Islamic financial thought, the prohibition of
riba precludes conventional borrower-lender relationships in which
borrowers are exposed to all sorts of risk, whilst the lender only risks
the borrower’s default. Islamic finance therefore is thought to exhibit
a strong preference for equity finance over debt finance. For example,
bank accounts – unless funds are kept with a bank purely for safekeeping
purposes – typically take the form of profit and loss sharing accounts,
where the account holder enters into a partnership arrangement with the
bank. Some scholars argue that banning the risk-free accumulation of
capital, and the concentration of wealth in the hands of only a few, is
part of Islam’s concern for greater economic and social justice. Thus
for instance, the ‘economic viability and profitability’ of a project
are crucial determinants of its fundability.[^12] Along these lines,
Islamic finance also forbids *gharar* (profiting from contractual
uncertainty) and *maisir* (gambling). Moreover, certain products and
practices such as pork, alcohol or prostitution are deemed *haram*
(prohibited). This also extends to their funding. Indeed, in Islamic
economic thought the market mechanism is complemented by a ‘moral
filter’ of what is socially desirable.[^13] Thus, Islamic finance bases
its claim to being an ethical approach to finance on the *religious
values with which it seeks to comply*.

Given these stipulations, what makes Islamic finance distinct as a
practice? Prima facie, Islamic finance promotes specific ideas about
debt, creditworthiness and the relationship between the financial and
the productive economy. Debt – no matter if sovereign, corporate or
household – is not a legitimately profitable activity. Creditworthiness
is based on the ‘worthiness’ (in terms of economic profitability but in
some interpretations also social desirability) of the project, and not
primarily the repayment capacity of the borrower. Islamic finance is
asset-oriented in that financial products have to be linked to the
‘real’ economy, which rules out many of the recent synthetic financial
innovations that were so heavily implicated in the 2007-9 global
financial crisis. In so doing, Islamic finance is thought to embrace the
mutually constitutive roles of the financial and the productive
dimensions of the economy. Indeed, on this reading the primary purpose
of finance is seen as serving the needs of the latter. Thus, the social
epistemology from which Islamic finance is built is distinct from that
which underpins much of contemporary mainstream finance. Moreover, these
features of Islamic finance have to be seen in the wider context of
Islamic economic philosophy which contains strong elements of
redistribution (notably through zakat, mandatory alms-giving by
individuals and firms), the idea of participatory economic growth, and
risk-sharing as the basis of a more equitable development, together with
a certain materiality or transactions focus as expressed in the sanctity
of contracts and property rights already maintained in the Quran. Thus,
Islamic finance bases its claim to being an ethical approach to finance
on the greater social justice of *the outcomes it intends to achieve*.

At the same time, however, procedural elements play an important role to
ensure the compliance of Islamic financial products and services with
the principles of the Sharia. In this regard, governance through Sharia
boards has emerged as a key mechanism in the Islamic legitimation of
Islamic financial products and services. Models of Sharia governance
vary across countries. Typically, Sharia boards operate at the firm
level, advising financial institutions on the Sharia compliance of the
products they develop. Here, the Sharia board derives its authority from
the reputation of the scholars specialised in Islamic jurisprudence who
compose it. However, in a number of countries, including Malaysia and
Indonesia, there also exist Sharia boards (or advisory councils) at the
national level, which hold the ultimate authority in ruling on what is
compliant or non-compliant with the principles of the Sharia. This is
meant to ensure consistency of Sharia interpretation and to provide
market participants with greater certainty. In Indonesia, the Sharia
governance of Islamic finance is civil society-centric in that the
Sharia board responsible for issuing national fatwas on Islamic finance
is located at the Indonesian Council of Ulama (*Dewan Syariah Nasional –
Majelis Ulama Indonesia* or DSN-MUI), more specifically its National
Sharia Board. DSN-MUI, formed in 1999, has ‘responsibility for
overseeing doctrinal compliance’ of Islamic financial institutions.[^14]
In many countries, a major challenge is to find Sharia scholars who are
not only proficient in Islamic jurisprudence but also have a good
understanding of how financial markets work. Thus, Islamic finance bases
its claim to being an ethical approach to finance on the *legitimation
practices* of Sharia scholars.

Islamic finance combines elements of both deontological and
consequentialist ethics.[^15] It does so on the grounds of both the
specific Sharia principles by which it abides, but also because of its
commitment to a financial order of greater social justice, based on the
general principles of equity, mutuality and sustainability, and its
emphasis on the social embeddedness of financial activity. In short, the
claim of Islamic finance to constituting an ethical approach to finance
rests both on the religious values that it embodies, the socio-economic
outcomes that it seeks to achieve, and the legitimation practices in
particular of Sharia scholars. Nevertheless, rather than presenting a
unified alternative to mainstream financial practice, Islamic finance
exhibits great variation both in the ways in which it is understood and
enacted, but also reacted to. Islamic finance is a product of ongoing
negotiation of the social world of finance and political contestation of
its value systems. Indeed, this is not just about how Islamic finance
and its conventional counterpart have been framed in various
professional, popular and media discourses before and after the global
financial crisis.[^16] It goes to the very heart of a financial reality
that only acquires meaning through the practices to which it gives rise
and the ways in which it is acted upon.

With regard to capital market finance specifically, attention has mainly
focused on developing new products that are Sharia-compliant and filter
out those that breach the principles of the Sharia. Interest-based
financial instruments such as conventional bonds are not acceptable.
Nevertheless, with *sukuk* Islamic finance promotes a class of
Sharia-compliant financial products that fulfil very similar functions.
Sukuk are typically structured in the form of claims on assets that
generate an income stream, such as land/rental income or leased assets,
whilst not being interest-based. In sharing profits and losses, equity
finance is by nature participatory and thus less controversial from an
Islamic perspective. Here, the focus very much lies on developing
screening technologies to filter out stocks that are not
Sharia-compliant, be it because a company engages in haram activities
(e.g. breweries producing and selling alcohol, arms manufacturers
producing and selling weapons etc.) or because it finances itself
through debt and thus engages in riba and fails to meet financial
ratios. Indeed, whereas Islamic finance scholarship has paid
considerable attention to the Sharia-compliance (or not) of a growing
range of Islamic financial product structures and capital flows, less
attention has been paid to the important other component of what ‘makes’
financial markets – the transaction element.[^17]

## Transactional Ethics at the Indonesia Stock Exchange

With a population of about 250 million people, roughly 87 percent of
which are Muslim, Indonesia is the country with the biggest Muslim
population in the world. This marks the emergence of Islamic finance in
Indonesia as an important development not just with regard to its
national implications but also its potentially wider global
significance. Nevertheless, Indonesia is still at a relatively early
stage of financial development – around 60 percent of the population are
classified as unbanked (i.e. without access to a bank account). The
first Islamic bank in Indonesia – Bank Muamalat – was created in 1991
and began its operations in 1992. It pursued a model of interest-free
banking. The development of Islamic banking in Indonesia accelerated in
the wake of the Asian financial crisis of 1997-8.[^18] With regard to
the development of the Islamic capital market (ICM) specifically, its
beginnings can be traced back to 1997, which saw the release of the
first Islamic mutual funds. In 2000, the Jakarta Islamic Index (JII) was
launched, containing the 30 most liquid Islamic stocks. However, its
impact on the development of the Islamic capital market in Indonesia was
marginal. Market participants hardly recognized that the capital market
of Indonesia had an Islamic stock index as indicator of Islamic capital
market performance.

While the Islamic capital market in Indonesia is not a ‘stand-alone’
market, but an integral part of the country’s capital markets and in
principle uses the same underwriting and trading mechanisms as the
conventional segment, both products and transactions have to comply with
the stipulations of the Sharia.[^19] DSN-MUI issued its first capital
market fatwa – on investment in Islamic mutual funds – in 2001.[^20]
This was followed by a number of fatwas on the product structures deemed
permissible in the Indonesian Islamic capital market.[^21] Along these
lines, the early 2000s also saw the launch of the first sukuk in the
Indonesian capital market, again with limited impact for the growth of
Islamic capital markets. In the mid-2000s the Securities Exchange
Commission Bapepam-LK (now submerged within the 2013 established
Financial Services Authority or OJK) issued a number of regulations to
promote the development of capital markets both in terms of market share
and number of investors, but growth remained slow.

Indeed, the development of the Islamic capital market in Indonesia only
gained momentum from 2011 onwards, which saw a number of landmark
developments aimed at: 1) increasing the visibility of the Islamic
capital market segment, 2) strengthening in particular its Sharia
governance and 3) raising awareness of Islamic capital market finance.
Firstly, IDX launched the Indonesia Sharia Stock Index (ISSI) in May
2011.[^22] As a consequence, there are now two Islamic stock indices in
the Islamic capital market of Indonesia: if the JII consists of the 30
most liquid Islamic stocks, then the constituents of ISSI are the entire
universe of Islamic stocks listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange (IDX).
The existence of ISSI had a positive impact on the development of the
Islamic capital market in Indonesia because it provided more options for
investors and investment managers wanting to invest in or manage Islamic
stock portfolios. It can also serve as a performance benchmark. The data
shows that the market responded positively to the presence of ISSI. The
importance of Islamic mutual funds as a popular product for investing in
Islamic stocks increased significantly, both in terms of number of funds
and assets under management. In the five years prior to the launch of
ISSI, the average of new issuance was only five Islamic mutual funds per
year, but after that the average of new issuances was fourteen per year.
As of end of October 2013, the market capitalization of the Islamic
capital market segment had reached IDR 2.618 trillion, approximating 60
percent of the total market capitalization of IDX valued at IDR 4.485
trillion.[^23]

Secondly, the revival of the Islamic capital market in Indonesia was
marked by the launch of a new fatwa on the Sharia-compliance of equity
trading mechanisms (in the following: Fatwa No. 80) in 2011.[^24] This
was the first DSN-MUI fatwa to be published simultaneously in Arabic,
English, and Indonesian. The main objective of Fatwa No. 80 was to
increase the confidence of investors who want to invest in Islamic
stocks in Indonesia’s capital market. Research showed that people who
want to invest in an Islamic way still worried about the compliance of
products and trading mechanisms in the Islamic capital market of
Indonesia with the Sharia. Although DSN-MUI had launched a number of
fatwas which related to Islamic capital market products, including the
types of *akad* (agreement) which could be used to structure products,
it was thought that the public still needed to be convinced that capital
market transactions themselves were compliant with Sharia principles.
Therefore, IDX in collaboration with DSN-MUI launched Fatwa No. 80.
Unlike previous capital market fatwas issued by DSN-MUI, where almost
the entire fatwa was focused on regulating Islamic capital market
products and related akad, Fatwa No. 80 regulates how to conduct
transactions in accordance with Sharia principles. In order to be
categorized as a Sharia-compliant investment, according to the fatwa,
two conditions must be met: only Islamic (i.e. Sharia-compliant) stock
can be traded (thus e.g. excluding stocks of breweries or conventional
banks) and the transaction itself must also comply with the Sharia.
Fatwa No. 80 details fourteen transactions that either do not comply
with the principles of the Sharia or are outright prohibited by the
Sharia. These include margin trading (interest-based transactions),
short selling (*bai’ al ma’dum*) and cornering (*ikhtikar*). In so
doing, Fatwa No. 80 takes a stand against speculative practices in
financial markets.

Thirdly, greater efforts were undertaken to raise awareness of Islamic
capital market finance among financial market practitioners, but also
journalists and the public at large. IDX in particular began to conduct
regular one-day training sessions on the Islamic capital market (Islamic
Capital Market Schools or *Sekolah Pasar Modal Syariah*). These are held
at the IDX office in the Sudirman Central Business District, Jakarta’s
main financial district. The syllabus includes an overview of the
Indonesian capital market in general, of Sharia principles and of the
Islamic capital market specifically. According to a survey IDX conducted
among past participants, it appears that the characteristics of
Sharia-based investors are relatively similar. They are more concerned
with Sharia-compliance than purely capital gain or return on investment.
If they are convinced that investing in the stock market is
Sharia-compliant then they would be investors, even if the advantages of
the investment may be relatively less compared to other investment
return. Therefore, the approach taken to draw them into the capital
market is relatively different from the conventional approach. They are
classified as new investors in the stock market, previously not willing
to invest in the stock market as they saw it as gambling and therefore
prohibited by the Sharia. However, after being given the proper
education about investing in the stock market and the issuance of Fatwa
No. 80, they became convinced that investing in the stock market can be
Sharia-compliant.

In combination, the launch of ISSI, together with the issuance of Fatwa
No. 80 and intense efforts to educate both financial market
practitioners and the public at large about Islamic finance has advanced
the development of the Islamic capital market in Indonesia. In
particular, the public understanding of the Islamic capital market
increased significantly as particular surveys with past participants of
training seminars indicate and led to growing interest in investing in
Islamic stocks. However, there remained a disconnect between the high
public interest in Sharia-based investment and a lack of understanding
of the mechanisms of Sharia-compliant transactions. It was deemed that
there was a need to create a system to accommodate the condition and to
assist investors when investing in Islamic stocks in meeting the
criteria of Sharia-compliant transactions detailed in Fatwa No. 80.

In response, IDX came up with a system of Sharia-compliant transactions,
the so-called Sharia Online Trading System. SOTS was developed in the
second half of 2011 and began its use as a pilot project at the end of
2011. SOTS gives practical definition to Fatwa No. 80 as a tool for
transacting Islamic stock in the Indonesian Islamic capital market. The
SOTS business model was created by IDX, but the actual systems are
developed by securities companies (brokers) which are exchange members.
They are then reviewed by DSN-MUI, which certifies their Sharia
compliance subject to them meeting all criteria and complying with Fatwa
No. 80. The Indonesia Stock Exchange (IDX) acts as a technical assistant
for exchange members (brokers) that develop SOTS. The purpose of this
assistance is to ensure that the development of SOTS complies with Fatwa
No. 80.

Exchange members that develop SOTS must have online trading systems that
comply with the Exchange’s criteria because it is an online-based system
for transacting Islamic stocks. As a mechanism for Islamic-based
transactions, SOTS must fulfil the main requirements of Islamic
compliance as governed by Fatwa No. 80 as follows:

1.  Only Islamic stocks can be traded. SOTS will block any transaction
    of stock that does not comply with the Sharia. Blocking is started
    from the first step of the transaction – that is when investors input
    a buying order of stocks.

2.  It must be a cash-basis transaction for buying Islamic stocks.
    Therefore, SOTS must clearly separate between cash in the Investor
    Account and Islamic stocks in the Securities Account. From an
    Islamic finance point of view, both have different definitions and
    functions. Therefore, SOTS does not recognise the existence of the
    net position between stocks and cash of investor transactions in the
    same day. The consequence of this concept is that exchange members
    (brokers) cannot execute a force-selling transaction of the investor
    portfolio.

3.  Margin trading (investor borrows money from broker to purchase
    stocks) is prohibited because it is categorized as a riba-based
    transaction.

4.  Short selling (investor sells stocks that is not owned by the
    seller) is prohibited because it is categorized as bai’ al
    ma’dum.[^25]

If a transaction is entered in SOTS that is in breach of Sharia
principles, a window pops up that tells how the transaction violates
Fatwa No. 80 (see Figures 1 and 2 for examples of margin trading and
short selling). While other stock exchanges such as the Islamic segment
of Bursa Malaysia also prevent activities such as short-selling, to the
best of our knowledge IDX SOTS is unique in that it is not only directly
derived from a fatwa, but also in that it very clearly has an
educational objective; it does not just prevent prohibited transactions
but highlights which Sharia principles are violated and thus seeks to
inculcate greater awareness of Sharia principles.

![Fig. 1: Screenshot of Prohibited Margin Trading. This transaction
violates specific provision 3h of Fatwa No. 80: Actions included in riba
category.](media/Images_Rethel/image1.jpg)

`Fig. 1: Screenshot of Prohibited Margin Trading. This transaction
violates specific provision 3h of Fatwa No. 80: Actions included in riba
category.`{.caption}

![Fig. 2: Screenshot of Prohibited Short Selling. This transaction
violates specific provision 3h of Fatwa No. 80: Actions included in bai’
as-ma’dum category.](media/Images_Rethel/image2.jpg)

`Fig. 2: Screenshot of Prohibited Short Selling. This transaction
violates specific provision 3h of Fatwa No. 80: Actions included in bai’
as-ma’dum category.`{.caption}

The inculcation of ethical behaviour in market transactions through
Fatwa No. 80 and SOTS is the result of a process of *double
translation*. In a first step, it entails the translation of financial
market behavior that is deemed unethical into a language understood by
Sharia scholars, who are proficient in the deliberation and application
of Sharia principles, but who are not necessarily experts on financial
markets. In a second step, Sharia principles specifically in regard to
these types of behavior are then translated into computer-based trading
systems to prevent prohibited transactions and produce the pop-up
screens intended not only to influence the behavior of market
participants but also to educate them in the principles of the Sharia.
At the Indonesia Stock Exchange, ethical behavior in market transactions
is sought to be enacted through a combination of concrete market
practices developed in dialogue with the interpretation and deliberation
of more abstract religious norms.

Currently, there are eight exchange members that have developed SOTS in
the Islamic capital market of Indonesia. In terms of numbers, this is
still a small fraction if compared to the total number of exchange
members in Indonesia that have implemented online trading systems.
However, the existence of SOTS in the Islamic capital market of
Indonesia has driven significant growth in terms of the numbers of
Islamic investors. According to IDX data, the number of investors
investing in a Sharia-compliant way in 2013 increased by 51 percent
compared to the previous year. In addition, all indicators of Islamic
stock trading performance, such as market capitalization, frequency, and
number of Islamic stocks showed a significant market share of over 50
percent. Thus, as the one and only Islamic stock trading system in the
world, SOTS has successfully accelerated the growth of the Islamic
capital market in Indonesia, especially with regard to Sharia-compliant
stocks and the trading in them. This is deemed to be very much in the
spirit of Islamic finance – developing mechanisms that comply with the
principles of the Sharia that are at the same time transaction-friendly
and here particularly intended to promote the growth not just of the
Islamic capital market segment, but the Indonesian capital market as a
whole.

## Islamic Finance: Mainstream/Alternative?

Advocates of Islamic finance see their claims for a more ethical
financial system vindicated by the fallout from the global financial
crisis of 2007-9. The crisis itself served as an accelerator of the
expansion of Islamic finance in terms of product innovation,
standardization of practices and geographical coverage. Indeed, just at
the time of writing, we see countries from across the globe intensifying
their engagement with Islamic finance – just witness the debut issuance
of sovereign sukuk by non-Muslim majority countries as diversely
situated as the UK, South Africa and Hong Kong. Both in its scale and in
terms of the space it occupies, Islamic finance is certainly very
different from some of the financial experiments discussed in this
volume. It is promoted by states, practiced by mainstream financial
institutions and makes use of the same platforms and knowledge
infrastructures as conventional finance. So has Islamic finance then
become part of the mainstream, increasingly detached from the
ethical/religious values which it supposedly purports?

The development of the Islamic capital market at the nexus of ethical
principles and market growth is not unambiguous – especially so as
ultimately the greater availability of Sharia-compliant investment
options is intended to draw more actors into the market, foreclosing the
possibility of non-market based financial alternatives. At the same
time, Islamic finance constitutes an inherently reflexive approach to
finance.[^26] This is not just about passing finance through a moral
filter, or layering religious values on top of financial practice as
usual. It goes to the heart of practical economic reasoning and in so
doing opens up new possibilities for *doing finance differently*. The
example of the Sharia Online Trading System discussed here is a case in
point.

## References

Abolafia, M.Y. *Making Markets: Opportunism and Restraint on Wall
Street*, Boston: Harvard University Press, 1996.

Al Harran, S. (ed.). *Leading Issues in Islamic Banking and Finance*,
Petaling Jaya: Pelanduk Publications, 1995.

Brassett, J. and L. Rethel. ‘Sexy Money: The Hetero-Normative Politics
of Global Finance’, *Review of International Studies*, forthcoming,
2015.

DSN-MUI. Fatwa No.80/DSN-MUI/III/2011 concerning ‘The Implementation of
Sharia Principles in The Equity Trading Mechanism at The Stock
Exchange’s Regular Market’, 2007,
<http://www.idx.co.id/Portals/0/StaticData/ProductAndServices/Sharia/Fatwano.80_English.pdf>.

Henry, C.M. and R. Wilson (eds). *The Politics of Islamic Finance*,
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2004.

Lindsey, T. ‘Between Piety and Prudence: State Syariah and the
Regulation of Islamic Banking in Indonesia’, *Sydney Law Review* 34
(2012): 107-127.

Maurer, B. *Mutual Life, Limited. Islamic Banking, Alternative
Currencies, Lateral Reason*, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2005.

Maurer, B. ‘Resocializing finance? Or Dressing it in Mufti? Calculating
Alternatives for Cultural Economies’, *Journal of Cultural Economy* 1.1
(2008): 65-78.

Maurer, B. *Pious Property. Islamic Mortgages in the United States*, New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.

Miranti K.D. and I. Abdalloh. ‘Socializing Islamic Capital Market
Products through Public Education Events: The Case of Indonesia’, Middle
East Institute, 20 February 2013,
<http://www.mei.edu/content/socializing-islamic-capital-market-products-through-public-education-events-case-indonesia>.

Palazzo. G. and L. Rethel.‘Conflicts of interest in financial
intermediation’, *Journal of Business Ethics* 81.1, 2008: 193-207.

Rethel, L. ‘Whose Legitimacy? Islamic Finance and the Global Financial
Order’, *Review of International Political Economy* 18.1 (2011): 75-98.

Rethel, L. ‘The Imaginary Landscapes of Islamic Finance’, chapter
prepared for J. Pollard and R. Martin (eds) *Handbook of the Geographies
of Money and Finance*, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2016.

Rice, G. ‘Islamic ethics and the implications for business’, *Journal of
Business Ethics* 18.4 (1999): 345-358.

Sen, A.K. *Money and Value: On the Ethics and Economics of Finance*
[Denaro e Valore: Etica ed Economia della Finanza], Rome: Bank of Italy,
1991.

Thompson, G. ‘What’s in the Frame? How the Financial Crisis is Being
Packaged for Consumption’, *Economy and Society* 38.3 (2009): 520-524.

Umar J. ‘The Development of Islamic Banking in the Post-Crisis
Indonesian Economy’, in: G. Fealy and S. White (eds.) *Expressing Islam.
Religious Life and Politics in Indonesia*, Singapore: ISEAS, 2008, pp.
229-250.

Warde, I. A. *Islamic Finance in the Global Economy*, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2000.

Watson, M. ‘What Makes a Market Economy? Schumpeter, Smith and Walras on
the Coordination Problem’, *New Political Economy* 10.2 (2005): 143-161.

World Exchanges‘Indonesia Stock Exchange’, (no date) available at: <http://www.world-exchanges.org/member-exchanges/key-information-/indonesia-stock-exchange>.

Zeti A.A. ‘Internationalisation of Islamic Finance: Bridging Economies’,
welcoming address by the Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia at the
*Global Islamic Finance Forum 2012*, Kuala Lumpur, 19 September 2012,
<http://www.bis.org/review/r120920d.pdf>.

[^1]: While it is notoriously difficult to pin down the exact time frame
    of the global financial crisis (and the term global might be a
    misnomer given that it was the transatlantic financial systems that
    were at its core), problems in the U.S. credit market that emerged in
    late 2006 led to tighter liquidity that resulted amongst other
    things in the bank run on U.K.-based Northern Rock in 2007, the first
    run on a British bank in over a century. The period from 2007-2009
    was characterised by a global liquidity crunch and recession in the
    U.S. This is not to say that the crisis is truly over yet. In 2009 it
    morphed into a crisis of sovereign debt in Europe and its
    repercussions are still felt today. 

[^2]: See, Guido Palazzo and Lena Rethel, ‘Conflicts of interest in
    financial intermediation’, *Journal of Business Ethics* 81.1(2008):
    193-207.

[^3]: See Matthew Watson, ‘What Makes a Market Economy? Schumpeter,
    Smith and Walras on the Coordination Problem’ in: *New Political
    Economy* 10.2 (2005): 143-161.

[^4]: For a critique, see James Brassett and Lena Rethel, ‘Sexy Money:
    The Hetero-Normative Politics of Global Finance’, *Review of
    International Studies*, forthcoming in 2015.

[^5]: See Lena Rethel, ‘Whose Legitimacy? Islamic Finance and the Global
    Financial Order’, *Review of International Political Economy* 18.1
    (2011): 75-98.

[^6]: See Amartya K. Sen, *Money and Value: On the Ethics and Economics
    of Finance* [Denaro e Valore: Etica ed Economia della Finanza],
    Rome: Bank of Italy, 1991; Bill Maurer, *Pious Property. Islamic Mortgages in the United States*, New York:
    Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.

[^7]: Ibrahim A. Warde, *Islamic Finance in the Global Economy*,
    Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000.

[^8]: Clement M. Henry and Rodney Wilson (eds) *The Politics of Islamic
    Finance*, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2004.

[^9]: Zeti Akhtar Aziz, ‘Internationalisation of Islamic Finance:
    Bridging Economies’, welcoming address by the Governor of the
    Central Bank of Malaysia at the *Global Islamic Finance Forum 2012*,
    Kuala Lumpur, 19 September 2012.

[^10]: The Quran is the holy book of Islam, equivalent to the Bible in
    Christianity, whereas the Hadith is a religious text that contains
    the utterances of the Prophet Mohammed and the Sunnah recounts the
    teachings and way of life of the Prophet

[^11]: Bill Maurer, *Mutual Life, Limited: Islamic Banking, Alternative
    Currencies, Lateral Reason*, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    2005, p. 39.

[^12]: Saad Al Harran (ed.) *Leading Issues in Islamic Banking and
    Finance*, Petaling Jaya: Pelanduk Publications 1995, p. xii.

[^13]: Gillian Rice, ‘Islamic Ethics and the Implications for Business’,
    *Journal of Business Ethics* 18.4 (1999): 346.

[^14]: Tim Lindsey, ‘Between Piety and Prudence: State Syariah and the
    Regulation of Islamic Banking in Indonesia’, *Sydney Law Review* 34
    (2012): 119.

[^15]: See Sen 1991 for a similar argument applied to Judeo-Christian
    finance

[^16]: See G. Thompson, ‘What’s in the Frame? How the Financial Crisis
    is Being Packaged for Consumption’, *Economy and Society* 38.3
    (2009): 520-524; and L. Rethel, ‘The Imaginary Landscapes of Islamic
    Finance’, chapter prepared for J. Pollard and R. Martin (eds)
    *Handbook of the Geographies of Money and Finance*, Cheltenham:
    Edward Elgar, 2016.

[^17]: Compare Mitchell Y. Abolafia, *Making Markets: Opportunism and
    Restraint on Wall Street*, Boston: Harvard University Press, 1996.

[^18]: Umar Juoro, ‘The Development of Islamic Banking in the
    Post-Crisis Indonesian Economy’, in G. Fealy and S. White (eds)
    *Expressing Islam: Religious Life and Politics in Indonesia*,
    Singapore: ISEAS, 2008, pp. 229-250.

[^19]: See Miranti Kartika Dewi and Irwan Abdalloh,‘Socializing Islamic
    Capital Market Products through Public Education Events: The Case of
    Indonesia’, Middle East Institute, 20 February 2013.

[^20]: Fatwa No. 20/DSN-MUI/IX/2001 concerning ‘Guidelines for the
    Implementation of Investment for Sharia Mutual Funds’.

[^21]: The fatwas issued by DSN-MUI to date can be accessed at
    [http://www.dsnmui.or.id/index.php?page=fatwa](http://www.dsnmui.or.id/index.php?page=fatwa).
    At the time of writing, Indonesia had fourteen fatwas issued by
    DSN-MUI specifically related to the Islamic capital market.

[^22]: In 2007, the Jakarta Stock Exchange merged with the Surabaya
    Stock Exchange to create the Indonesia Stock Exchange (IDX).

[^23]: See IDX press release, 2 November 2013,
    [http://www.idx.co.id/Beranda/BeritadanPengumuman/SiaranPers/ReadPressRelease/tabid/191/ItemID/d72739a7-a3cb-482f-8b2d-040c7ab0d4e8/language/id-ID/Default.aspx](http://www.idx.co.id/Beranda/BeritadanPengumuman/SiaranPers/ReadPressRelease/tabid/191/ItemID/d72739a7-a3cb-482f-8b2d-040c7ab0d4e8/language/id-ID/Default.aspx).

[^24]: See Fatwa No. 80/DSN-MUI/III/2011 concerning ‘The Implementation
    of Sharia Principles in the Equity Trading Mechanism at the Stock
    Exchanges Regular Market’.

[^25]: Note that in the conventional market segment, IDX applies a
    policy of regulated short selling, which is a permitted market
    transaction, although only for certain shares. On the last trading
    day of every month, IDX announces the list of shares permitted for
    margin trading and short selling. See World Exchanges, ‘Indonesia
    Stock Exchange’ (no date).

[^26]: See in particular Bill Maurer, ‘Resocializing Finance? Or
    Dressing it in Mufti? Calculating Alternatives for Cultural
    Economies’, *Journal of Cultural Economy* 1.1 (2008): 65-78.
