---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: Tiziana Terranova and Andrea Fumagalli
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  Tiziana Terranova is Associate Professor of Cultural Theory and New Media in theDepartment of Human and Social Sciences at the University of Naples ‘L’Orientale’.Terranova is the author of Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age and iscurrently writing a book on digital social networks to be published by University ofMinnesota Press.
Andrea Fumagalli is Associate Professor of Economics in the Department of Economicsand Management at University of Pavia. His research activity deals with the hypothesisof cognitive bio-capitalism, basic income, and precarity issues. He is co-editor ofThe Global Economic Crisis (Semiotext(e), 2011).
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Financial Capital and the Money of the Common: The Case of Commoncoin

### Tiziana Terranova and Andrea Fumagalli {.author}

On the 21st and 22nd of June 2014, just a few months after the MoneyLab
conference in Amsterdam, a group of researchers and militants including
the authors of this article met at the social center Macao (located in
the ex-slaughterhouse of the city of Milan) to discuss different ways to
implement a new cryptocurrency, which was later named ‘Commoncoin’. The
Macao workshop was just one in a series of events to take place across
Europe in 2014. The events included (among others) the workshop on
Algorithms and Capital hosted by the Digital Culture Research Unit at
Goldsmiths College in London[^3_3-Terranova_1]; the launch of D-Cent, a European
research project on complementary currencies[^3_3-Terranova_2]; the MoneyLab
conference in Amsterdam[^3_3-Terranova_3]; and the workshop of the Robin Hood Minor
Asset Management Cooperative in Stuttgart.[^3_3-Terranova_4] These events took place
against the background of the possibilities opened up by the success of
Bitcoin, but also against the pressure of the ongoing recession and the
austerity policies imposed by the European Central Bank after 2008,
dictating to countries such as Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Italy
structural adjustment policies already familiar to Asian and African
nations since the 1990s. In such a way, the financial crisis of 2008 was
turned into the occasion for the imposition of an ever more intensive
precarization of labor compounded by drastic cuts to public services
opening the way to privatization and a re-structuring of the Welfare
State into a Workfare model.[^3_3-Terranova_5] These European meetings thus expressed
a specific, situated response to a global process of financialization,
looking at the changed nature of money and capital while also
considering whether an alternative financial circuit could break the
hold that the financial oligarchy exercises on our hopes and lives.

Rather than hoping for a return to the ‘real’ (Fordist) economy against
the ‘false’ economy of finance, the meeting in Milan drew on theoretical
arguments, which emphasized the structural importance of finance to a
global economy where the extraction of surplus value is generalized to
the whole of society while labor as such assumes an affective,
cooperative, and cognitive dimension.[^3_3-Terranova_6] From this perspective,
financialization is considered as the answer of capitalism to the
urgency of creating a new dispositif of accumulation given the
centrality of the network as a mode of logistical organization and
patterning of social cooperation. As the division of labor in the
factory and the distinction between productive and reproductive work is
supplemented and displaced by social cooperation as the main source of
value, the political concept of the common identifies a new political
platform beyond public and private, state and market.[^3_3-Terranova_7] The capability
of finance to express the value of such cooperation through a form of
money which is not simply exchangeable into commodities but which has
the power to shape the future(s) is a crucial stake in new forms of
struggle, which envelop and exceed the terms of the older workers’
movements. Labor performed for a wage within given times and spaces
(factories, offices), and organized by entrepreneurs and managers, is
only a part of a larger pool of value-creating activities. These
activities know no difference between work and leisure, paid work and
free labor and depends on extensive socialization and circulation of
ideas, percepts, and affects. At the meeting in Milan, we started from
the notion that the common – that is the pre-and trans-individual
potential which we draw onto and create when communicating, talking,
listening, making, designing, calculating, caring for each other and for
the earth, bringing up children, making music, film, etc. – is the
ontological basis of the production of wealth and social life as such.
By privatizing gains and socializing losses, financialization both
expresses the importance of the common as source of value – the dire
consequences of financial capital as a dispositif of accumulation – and
the possibility of financial institutions of the common nurturing and
nourishing that financial capital depletes.

At the Milan conference, organized by Effemera Network (born, together
with the Euronomade network, after the dissolution of UniNomade 2.0),
the focus was on the idea of a new cryptocurrency aimed at the circuit
of Italian occupied theatres, at the movements of precarious workers, at
the network of social centers, but also at the larger alternative
economy circuit including farmers’ movements against seed patenting and
others. At the end of the meeting the new cryptocurrency was named
‘Commoncoin’ and a model was developed which started from the Bitcoin
protocol, but introduced some elements of novelty. The first point of
deviation was the statement that the ‘Commoncoin’ aimed to contribute to
the invention of an alternative economic system as a form of
finance/credit money able to remunerate social cooperation and the work
performed by the general intellect. Functioning against the widespread
logic of unpaid and voluntary work, a Commoncoin should be able to
finance new forms of welfare (commonfare) based on unconditional basic
income hypothesis and free access to common goods. The idea was raised
of an alternative form of money that generates a production of
use-values rather than functioning as a medium of exchange-values. The
second point of departure was in the consideration that the objective
design of the Bitcoin protocol should make space for the inclusion of a
subjective and social element in money creation by possibly deploying
the technologies of the social internet. The mood surrounding the event
was one which posed, against the dire backdrop of austerity and debt,
the possibility of an historical opportunity enabled by the total
dematerialization of money after the collapse of Bretton Woods and the
rise of finance money as ‘pure sign’, without any form of control by
state monetary sovereignty.

The notion that 90 percent of money in circulation exists already as a
digital signal encoded in networks of computers can produce a kind of
neo-Baudrillardian interpretation of virtual money. As sign without
referent, virtual currency could be understood as the final colonization
of the real economy by a hyperreal domain of speculation – a pure
simulation. The notion of a bad, fake financialization opposed to the
real economy is contested both by activist anthropologists of the
financial world[^3_3-Terranova_8], but also by post-workerist Marxists who, as we have
seen, consider financialization as the answer of capital to the crisis
of measure – that is the inability to measure productivity on the basis
of the labor theory of value. Financialization has a potential: it
reveals how money can function as an invention and that it can also
account for different ways of organizing the production and distribution
of wealth, which is alternative to both socialism (state) and market
(capital). Financialization makes us also think of the potential for
monetary production to be designed in such a way as to enrich not only
the few (communism of capital), but the many (the communism of the
common).

The notion of something like a ‘commoncoin’ for the network of occupied
spaces in Italy is just one of the examples one could point to in the
veritable proliferation of digital currencies which has characterized
the early 2010s (such as Litecoin, Ripple, Bitcoin). Most of these
cryptocurrencies have copied, forked or innovated Bitcoin, the first one
to attract the attention both of stock markets and mainstream media.
Discussions around the best way to encode and implement a cryptocurrency
such as Commoncoin emphasize how the design of a cryptocurrency
expresses not simple technical choices aiming at maximizing efficiency,
but also value systems. To use the most common example, Bitcoin emerged
out of the hacker community energized into action by the so-called
WikiLeaks financial blockade. This saw the whole financial
infrastructure of the internet (PayPal, Visa, Mastercard) mobilized
against Julian Assange and his team of cypherpunks under the lead of the
U.S. government. Bitcoin encodes the core values of the libertarian
cypherpunk society: a rejection of state control and of the dominion of
large corporations; the endorsement of anonymity or at least
pseudonymity; the deployment of a peer-to-peer architecture with no
central control; and a distrust of subjective relations which aims at
minimizing the human and social element by means of objective
mechanisms.

The question that the larger cryptocurrency movement poses, however, can
also be framed in these terms: can other sets of values be encoded in a
cryptocurrency beyond those expressed by the Bitcoin protocol? How can
different communities, collectives, and assemblages engage with the
process of virtual currency creation? In the case of Commoncoin, the
question was further specified: can we conceive of not just a single
cryptocurrency, but a whole cryptocurrency network as an aid and a tool
for an alternative mode of production? The economists present at the
Milan meeting brought a strong argument to the workshop: with the
transition from the hegemony of Taylorist-Fordist capitalism to
cognitive and financialized bio-capitalism – the main function of money
has changed. The credit function was typical of the previous phase,
where the ‘M(oney)-C(ommodity)-M(oney)’ circuit (the monetary production
economy) provided liquidity to invest in the production of goods by
means of a monetary anticipation causing the indebtness of economic
actors (either private firms or the state). What we are facing today is
a transition from credit money to financial money that coincides with
the total dematerialization of money, which thus becomes pure sign
money. What makes the cryptocurrency movement possible and important is
the transition from credit money, which is issued under the control of
monetary institutions (such as Central Banks) to finance money, which
depends on the social dynamics of the oligarchy of the financial market.

For theorists of cognitive capitalism, money, and the determination of
its value is thus no longer under the control of Central Banks (even as
specific central banks such as the ECB and the Fed might implement
different strategies). At the very moment when money becomes pure sign
money, it escapes any public scrutiny. Money loses the status of ‘public
property good’ and its value is determined moment by moment through the
operations of the speculative activity in financial markets. Its
functions as means of payment and unit of account (measure of value), as
well as a store of value and means of finance accumulation, escape
control. At a time when its quantity and mode of issue are determined by
the conventions that dominate an increasingly concentrated financial
system, money becomes hostage to the expectations that the oligarchy (or
rather, the dictatorship of the oligarchy) of the financial markets is
able to exercise.

Today, we can say that the creation of finance money is the expression
of the libertarian communism of capital. Money is, thus, an expression
of financial bio-power, since its value is determined by the financial
conventions, whose governance represents a proxy of the expropriation of
the common, as the new form of capital-labor exploitation in cognitive
biocapitalism. The question becomes: can a network of cryptocurrencies,
once freed by institutional constraints, become part of a larger
assemblage able to carry a counter-attack to the oligarchy of large
financial intermediaries? In other words, can the cryptocurrency
networks, even when they play the role of store of value (as in
Bitcoin), avoid being subsumed by the traditional financial system? Can
they contribute to emancipation and not subsumption; be an alternative
and not merely another compatible module? The new cryptocurrency
movement will have the difficult task of connecting to a larger movement
capable of overturning those relations of forces, which have produced
financialization as ‘revolution from above’, and turned labor into a
commodity whose cost is ever closer to zero. Can cryptocurrencies
contribute to the creation of what Christian Marazzi has called a ‘money
of the common’, that is a ‘money that gives expression to and
acknowledges what is common to a multitude… in a political, social and
demographic space?’[^3_3-Terranova_9]

If conceived as alternative to the monetary and financial production
economy, Commoncoin could be used at first as complementary monetary
payment of labor-force, able to increase the wages, paid in traditional
money, but also finance a basic income as primary income, able to
remunerate the entire life put to labor and, hence, to value. A money of
the common (of which Commoncoin constitutes an experiment) could
re-create a different economic circuit, in which material and immaterial
production is no more financed by the credit market. And the simplest
way is, from this point of view, to imagine a sort of common financial
institution, able to generate money according to the logic of social
cooperation, which is irreducible and irreconcilable to the traditional
financial hierarchies. In other words, we need a tool, or better, more
tools able to favor the reappropriation of the Commonwealth that we all
contribute to generate.

Unlike even heterodox economists such as Robert Shiller and André
Orléan, Marazzi insists that money-creation does not dissolve into a
pure mimetic space, but expresses somehow the ‘substance’ of social
cooperation and its main product: the Commonwealth as the expression of
the biopolitical existence of human beings. In the extractivist mode of
accumulation which for some characterizes contemporary capitalism, this
money flows into the hands of the financial oligarchy as insurance and
pension funds, mortgage and loan payments, national debts interests,
profit enabled by the privatization of the institutions of welfare, and
the commercialization of data generated by use in the mode of peer
production which are now added to the traditional extraction of surplus
work from waged labor. The Common is composed by the vital and cognitive
faculties of human beings, from knowledge to the body, from relations to
sensations, from language to movement, from sensuality to thought: a
production of surplus that derives from the mere fact of existing. As
Brian Massumi has recently put it, the economy can be seen to rest on
the groundless ground of ‘bare activity’.[^3_3-Terranova_10] In its two main
articulations (the re/productive and the cognitive commonwealth), the
common is the basis on which the process of *subsumption* of life under
capital in the age of cognitive-biocapitalism is articulated: it is a
source of absolute, as well as of relative surplus value. Appropriation
of the Commonwealth thus means the appropriation of the relative and
absolute surplus value generated by the subsumption of life, pointing to
the necessity to go beyond the capitalist stage towards new form of
organization of existence. From this point of view, the money of the
common together with the concept of welfare of the Common (Commonfare),
irreducible to process of managing and supplying common goods, is a
revolutionary proposal.

If money can be designed, it is argued, it is because the general
intellect has evolved and can thus perform not just exchange but also
finance. Within the current forms of scriptural, financialized money, it
is possible to glimpse the possibility of a currency sustaining an
anthropogenetic economy based on a post-socialist form of welfare. A new
ecology of money able to perform different functions and feeding the
common rather than exhausting it will need algorithms and peer-to-peer
networks (Bitcoin innovation) but also social plug ins, tagging, comment
boxes, and algorithms working on social quantities (entropic data); it
will express a different kind of subjectivity and social values of a
larger population that the one of brokers, traders, investment fund
managers, hedge funders and such likes. It will break with the notion
that human beings are profit-maximizing individuals and open up to a
multiplicity of values and interests that humans hold because they are
social beings; associative creatures who cannot but live in societies,
who develop bonds, who need the company, conversation, and support of
other humans, and hence are dependent on a variety of elements (natural,
technological etc.) to sustain and reinvent their existence.

## References

Bollier David and Helfrich Silke. *The Wealth of the Commons: A World
Beyond Market and State*, Amherst, MA: Levellers Press, 2012.

Fumagalli, Andrea. ‘Digital (Crypto) Money and Alternative Financial
Circuits: Lead the Attack to the Heart of the State, Sorry, of Financial
Market’, in *Quaderni di San Precario*, 2014,
<http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/digital-crypto-money-and-alternative-financial-circuits-lead-the-attack-to-the-heart-of-the-state-sorry-of-financial-market-by-andrea-fumagalli/>.

Fumagalli, Andrea and Stefano Lucarelli. ‘Cognitive Capitalism as
Financial Economy of Production’, in Andrea Fumagalli, Carlo Vercellone,
and Vladimir Cvijanović (eds) *Cognitive Capitalism and its Reflections
in South-Eastern Europe*, Frankfurt, Peter Lang, 2010.

Griziotti, Giorgio. ‘Biorank: Algorithms and Transformation in the Bios
of Cognitive Capitalism’, in *Quaderni di San Precario*, 6 February
2014,
<http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/biorank-algorithms-and-transformation-in-the-bios-of-cognitive-capitalism-di-giorgio-griziotti/>.

Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. *Commonwealth*. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press, 2011.

Lazzarato, Maurizio. *Les révolutions du capitalisme*, Paris: Empêcheurs
de Penser en Rond, 2004.

Lucarelli, Stefano. ‘Il principio della liquidità e la sua corruzione.
Un contributo alla discussione su algoritmi e capitale’, in *Quaderni di
San Precario*, 4 February 2014,
<http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/il-principio-della-liquidita-e-la-sua-corruzione-un-contributo-alla-discussione-su-algoritmi-e-capitale-di-stefano-lucarelli/>.

Marazzi, Christian. ‘Summer School: La moneta del comune’, *Uninomade
2.0,* 13 September 2012, <http://www.uninomade.org/moneta-del-comune/>.

Massumi, Brian. *The Power at the End of the Economy, Art Beyond
Interest, Joy Beyond Reason.* São Paulo and Helsinki: n-1 Edições, 2014.

Morini, Cristina. *Per amore o per forza. Femminilizzazione del lavoro e biopolitiche del corpo.* Verona: Ombre Corte, 2010.

Piironen, Pekka and Virtanen, Akseli. ‘Democratization of Finance: An
Interview’, *Robin Hood Minor Asset Management*,
<http://www.robinhoodcoop.org/pages/democratization-of-finance-an-interview>.

Roos, Jerome. ‘In Each Other We Trust: Coining Alternatives to
Capitalism’, *Roarmag.org*, 31 March 2014,
<http://roarmag.org/2014/03/moneylab-conference-alternative-currencies/>.

Scott, Brett. *The Heretic’s Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the Future
of Money*. London: Pluto Press, 2013.

Terranova, Tiziana. ‘Red Stack Attack! Algorithms, Capital and the Automation of the Common’, *Euronomade*, <http://www.euronomade.info/?p=2268>.

\_\_\_\_\_\_.‘Social Unionism and Digital Labor in the Transnational
Space of European Austerity’, *Euronomade*,
<http://www.euronomade.info/?p=3416>.

Vercellone, Carlo. ‘From Formal Subsumption to General Intellect:
Elements for a Marxist Reading of the Thesis of Cognitive Capitalism’,
*Historical Materialism* 15.1 (2007): 13-36.

[^3_3-Terranova_1]: For further reference see: Tiziana, Terranova, ‘Red Stack Attack!
    Algorithms, Capital and the Automation of the Common’, *Euronomade*,
    [http://www.euronomade.info/?p=2268](http://www.euronomade.info/?p=2268); Stefano
    Lucarelli, ‘Il principio della liquidità e la sua corruzione. Un
    contributo alla discussione su algoritmi e capitale’, *Quaderni di
    San Precario*, 4 February 2014,
    [http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/il-principio-della-liquidita-e-la-sua-corruzione-un-contributo-alla-discussione-su-algoritmi-e-capitale-di-stefano-lucarelli/](http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/il-principio-della-liquidita-e-la-sua-corruzione-un-contributo-alla-discussione-su-algoritmi-e-capitale-di-stefano-lucarelli/);
    Andrea, Fumagalli, ‘Digital (Crypto) Money and Alternative Financial
    Circuits: Lead the Attack to the Heart of the State, Sorry, of
    Financial Market’, *Quaderni di San Precario*, 2 February 2014,
    [http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/digital-crypto-money-and-alternative-financial-circuits-lead-the-attack-to-the-heart-of-the-state-sorry-of-financial-market-by-andrea-fumagalli/](http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/digital-crypto-money-and-alternative-financial-circuits-lead-the-attack-to-the-heart-of-the-state-sorry-of-financial-market-by-andrea-fumagalli/);
    Giorgio, Griziotti, ‘Biorank: Algorithms and Transformation in the
    Bios of Cognitive Capitalism’, *Quaderni di San Precario*, 6
    February 2014,
    [http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/biorank-algorithms-and-transformation-in-the-bios-of-cognitive-capitalism-di-giorgio-griziotti/](http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/biorank-algorithms-and-transformation-in-the-bios-of-cognitive-capitalism-di-giorgio-griziotti/).

[^3_3-Terranova_2]: See, <http://dcentproject.eu>.

[^3_3-Terranova_3]: Jerome Roos, ‘In Each Other We Trust: Coining Alternatives to
    Capitalism’, *Roarmag.org*, 31 March 2014,
    [http://roarmag.org/2014/03/moneylab-conference-alternative-currencies/](http://roarmag.org/2014/03/moneylab-conference-alternative-currencies/).

[^3_3-Terranova_4]: Pekka Piironen and Akseli Virtanen, ‘Democratization of Finance:
    An Interview’, *Robin Hood Minor Asset Management*,
    [http://www.robinhoodcoop.org/pages/democratization-of-finance-an-interview](http://www.robinhoodcoop.org/pages/democratization-of-finance-an-interview).

[^3_3-Terranova_5]: Tiziana Terranova, ‘Social Unionism and Digital Labor in the
    Transnational Space of European Austerity’, *Euronomade*,
    [http://www.euronomade.info/?p=3416](http://www.euronomade.info/?p=3416).

[^3_3-Terranova_6]: For further reading see: Christian Marazzi, ‘Summer School: La
    moneta del comune’, *Uninomade 2.0,* 13 September 2012,
    Cristina Morini and Andrea Fumagalli, ‘Life Put to Work: Towards a
    Theory of Life-Value’, *Ephemera* 10.3/4 (2010): 234-252; Cristina
    Morini, *Per amore o per forza. Femminilizzazione del lavoro e
    biopolitiche del corpo*, Verona: Ombre Corte, 2010*;* Carlo
    Vercellone, ‘From Formal Subsumption to General Intellect: Elements
    for a Marxist Reading of the Thesis of Cognitive Capitalism’,
    *Historical Materialism* 15.1 (2007): 13-36; Maurizio Lazzarato,
    *Les révolutions du capitalisme*, Paris: Empêcheurs de Penser en
    Rond, 2004.

[^3_3-Terranova_7]: David Bollierand and Silke Helfrich, *The Wealth of the Commons: A
    World Beyond Market and State*, Amherst, MA: Levellers Press, 2012;
    Andrea Fumagalli, ‘Twenty Theses on Contemporary Capitalism
    (Cognitive Biocapitalism)’, *Angelaki* 16 (2011): 7-17; Michael
    Hardt and Antonio Negri, *Commonwealth*, Cambridge, MA: Belknap
    Press, 2011; Cristina Morini, *Per amore o per forza.
    Femminilizzazione del lavoro e biopolitiche del corpo*, Verona:
    Ombre Corte, 2010*;* Andrea Fumagalli, and Stefano Lucarelli,
    ‘Cognitive Capitalism as Financial Economy of Production’, in Andrea
    Fumagalli, Carlo Vercellone and Vladimir Cvijanović (eds) *Cognitive
    Capitalism and its Reflections in South-Eastern Europe,* Frankfurt:
    Peter Lang, 2010*;* Christian Marazzi, ‘Summer School: La moneta del
    commune’.

[^3_3-Terranova_8]: Brett Scott, *The Heretic’s Guide to Global Finance: Hacking the
    Future of Money*. London: Pluto Press, 2013.

[^3_3-Terranova_9]: Christian Marazzi, ‘Summer School: La Moneta del Commune’.

[^3_3-Terranova_10]: Brian Massumi, *The Power at the End of the Economy, Art Beyond
    Interest, Joy Beyond Reason.* São Paulo and Helsinki: n-1 Edições,
    2014.
