---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# MoneyLab Reader: An Intervention in Digital Economy


**MoneyLab Reader: An Intervention in Digital Economy**

Editors: Geert Lovink, Nathaniel Tkacz, Patricia de Vries

Copy editing: Annie Goodner, Morgan Currie

Design: Katja van Stiphout

Cover design: Content Context

Printer:

Publisher: Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2015

ISBN: 978-90-822345-5-8

**Contact**

Institute of Network Cultures

phone: +31205951865

email: info@networkcultures.org

web: www.networkcultures.org

Order a copy or download this publication freely at:
www.networkcultures.org/publications/

Join the re-search mailing list about online search at:

http://listcultures.org/mailman/listinfo/re-search\_listcultures.org

Supported by: Create-IT, Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences
(Hogeschool van Amsterdam), and Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing

Thanks to everyone at INC, to all of the authors for their
contributions, Annie Goodner and Morgan Currie for their copy editing,
and to Amsterdam Creative Industries Publishing for their financial
support.

This publication is licensed under Creative Commons

Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0).

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/.

[cover]

MoneyLab Reader

**An Intervention in Digital Economy**

Edited by Geert Lovink, Nathaniel Tkacz, Patricia de Vries

INC Reader \#10

**Previously published INC Readers:**

The INC Reader series is derived from conference contributions and
produced by the Institute of Network Cultures. They are available in
print and PDF form. The *Unlike Us Reader* is the eighth publication in
the series.

INC Reader\#9: René König and Miriam Rasch (eds),

*Society of the Query Reader: Reflections on Web Search*, 2013.

INC Reader \#8: Geert Lovink and Miriam Rasch (eds),

*Unlike Us: Social Media Monopolies and Their Alternatives*, 2013.

INC Reader \#7: Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz (eds),

*Critical Point of View: A Wikipedia Reader*, 2011.

INC Reader \#6: Geert Lovink and Rachel Somers Miles (eds),

*Video Vortex Reader II: Moving Images Beyond Youtube*, 2011.

INC Reader \#5: Scott McQuire, Meredith Martin and Sabine Niederer
(eds),

*Urban Screens Reader*, 2009.

INC Reader \#4: Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer (eds),

*Video Vortex Reader: Responses to YouTube*, 2008.

INC Reader \#3: Geert Lovink and Ned Rossiter (eds),

*MyCreativity Reader: A Critique of Creative Industries*, 2007.

INC Reader \#2: Katrien Jacobs, Marije Janssen and Matteo Pasquinelli
(eds),

*C’LICK ME: A Netporn Studies Reader*, 2007.

INC Reader \#1: Geert Lovink and Soenke Zehle (eds),

*Incommunicado Reader*, 2005.

All INC Readers, and other publications like the Network Notebooks
Series and Theory on Demand, can be downloaded and read for free. See
www.networkcultures.org/publications.

**CONTENTS**

**Saskia Sassen**

Foreword to the MoneyLab Reader

**Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz**

Introduction

THE LONG GAME

**Keith Hart**

Money in the Making of World Society

**Franco Berardi **

Is There Life Beyond Money?

**Ralph and Stefan Heidenreich**

On a Post-Monetary Network Based Economy

**Douglas Rushkoff**

Playability and the Search for an Open Source Economy

**Andrew Ross**

Accumulation and Resistance in the 21st Century

FINANCIAL INTERVENTIONS

**Primavera De Filippi and Samer Hassan**

Measuring Value in the Commons-Based Ecosystem: Bridging the Gap Between the Commons and the Market 

**Pekka Piironen and Akseli Virtanen**

Democratizing the Power of Finance: A Discussion About Robin Hood Asset
Management Cooperative with Founder Akseli Virtanen

**Lena Rethel and Irwan Abdalloh**

Inculcating Ethical Behaviour in Market Transactions? The Case of the
Sharia Online Trading System in Indonesia

CRITICAL CURRENCIES

**David Golumbia**

Bitcoin as Politics: Distributed Right-Wing Extremism

**Beat Weber**

The Economic Viability of Complementary Currencies: Bound to Fail?

**Tiziana Terranova and Andrea Fumagalli**

Financial Capital and the Money of the Common: The Case of Commoncoin

**Finn Brunton **

Heat Exchanges

ECONOMIES OF IMAGINATION

**Max Haiven**

Money as a Medium of the Imagination: Art and the Currencies of
Cooperation

**Stephanie Rothenberg**

Reversal of Fortune: Visualizing Marketized Philanthropy

**Paolo Cirio**

(W)orld Currency

**Jim Costanzo**

The Free Money Movement

TECHNOLOGIES OF PAYMENT

**Bill Maurer and Lana Swartz**

Wild, Wild West: A View From Two California Schoolmarms

**Rachel O’Dwyer**

Money Talks: The Enclosure of Mobile Payments

**Erin Taylor**

Mobile Money: Financial Globalization, Alternative, or Both?

**Eduard de Jong, Nathaniel Tkacz and Pablo Velasco **

‘Live as Friends and Count as Enemies’: On Digital Cash and the Media of Payment

CROWDFUNDING AND BEYOND

**Inge Ejbye Sørensen**

Go Crowdfund Yourself! Some Unintended Consequences of Crowdfunding for Documentary Film and Industry in the U.K.

**Renée Ridgway**

Crowdfunding the Commons?

**Irina Enache and Robert van Boeschoten**

The MonelyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit for Creatives

APPENDICES

**MoneyLab Conference**

**Author Biographies**

**Appendix**

**MONEYLAB: COINING ALTERNATIVES**

**March 21-22, 2014, Lab111 Amsterdam**

**FRIDAY, March 21, 2014**

**Session 1: Monetization of Everything**

Moderators: Geert Lovink, Nathaniel Tkacz

Speakers: Saskia Sassen, Stefan and Ralph Heidenreich, Bill Maurer,

**Session 2: Dismantling Global Finance**

Moderator: Nathaniel Tkacz

Speakers: Franco Berardi, Brett Scott, Tiziana Terranova, Brian Holmes

**Session 3: Critical Art Practices**

Moderator: Patricia de Vries

Speakers: Ron Peperkamp, Dadara, Dette Glashouwer

**Session 4: Mobile Money**

Moderator: Bill Maurer

Speakers: Erin Taylor, Taylor Nelms, and Gawain Lynch

**SATURDAY, March 22, 2014**

**Session 5: Bitcoin and Beyond**

Moderators: Nathaniel Tkacz and Lana Swartz

Speakers: Eduard de Jong, Aaron Koenig, Beat Weber, Quinn DuPont

**Session 6: Alternatives Bazaar On Stage**

Speakers: Bitcoin ATM, Geheimagentur, Noppes, Peerby, Qoin, Kunst
Reserve Bank, Share NL, The Next Nature Network, Timebank CC, Transition
Towns Netherlands

**Session 7: Critique of Crowdfunding**

Moderator: Brett Scott

Speakers: Inge Ejbye Sørensen, Jamie King, Marijke Hoogenboom, Irina
Enache and Robert van Boeschoten

**Session 8: Designing Alternatives**

Moderator: Rob Van Hilten

Speakers: Max Haiven, Matthew Slater and Eli Gothill, Lana Swartz

**Author Biographies**

**Irwan Abdalloh** is the head of Islamic Capital Market Development at
the Indonesia Stock Exchange (IDX). He is a lecturer in Islamic
Investment in the Postgraduate Program of the University of Indonesia
and at the Tazkia University College of Islamic Economics. He is the
founder of [icmspecialist.com](http://www.icmspecialist.com).

**Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi** is a writer, media theorist, and media
activist. He recently published *The Uprising* (2012). As a coordinator
of the European School for Social Imagination (SCEPSI), he has taught at
Ashkal Alwan in Beirut, PEI-Macba in Barcelona, Accademia di Brera in
Milano, and has lectured in social centers and universities worldwide.

**Finn Brunton** is an assistant professor in the Department of Media,
Culture, and Communication at NYU's Steinhardt School. He is the author
of *Spam: A Shadow History of the Internet* (MIT, 2013), and the
forthcoming *Obfuscation: A User's Guide* (MIT, 2015) with Helen
Nissenbaum. He is working on a book about cryptocurrencies.

**Paolo Cirio's** art projects investigate issues such as privacy,
transparency, copyright, finance, and democracy. He renders his
conceptual works through performances, photos, drawings, videos, and
installations. His work has unsettled Facebook, Amazon, Google, and
NATO, among others. He currently lives in New York City.

**Jim Costanzo** is the founding director of the Aaron Burr Society. His
conceptually based artwork is diverse and includes installation,
performance, and collaboration. He has shown his work at the Berlin
Biennale, the Whitney Biennial, and Arti et Amicitiae in Amsterdam. He
lives in Brooklyn, New York and teaches at Pratt Institute.

**Primavera De Filippi** is a postdoctoral researcher at the CERSA /
CNRS / Université Paris II (Panthéon-Assas). She is currently a research
fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law
School, where she is investigating the legal challenges of
‘governance-by-design’ in online distributed architectures, such as
Bitcoin and Ethereum.

**Eduard de Jong** is an Amsterdam-based computer scientist,
entrepreneur and inventor trying to improve security in software
systems. He worked on software for smartcards, later marketed as Java
Card. De Jong started his career working at DigiCash, where he developed
a passion for electronic money.

**Irina Enache** is a communication and new media enthusiast. She has
collaborated with the Institute of Network Cultures as a researcher for
the MoneyLab project in 2013-2014. She gained her BA in Communication
and Public Relations in Bucharest, Romania (2011) and the MA in New
Media and Digital Culture in Amsterdam, Netherlands (2013).

**Andrea Fumagalli** is Associate Professor of Economics in the
Department of Economics and Management at University of Pavia. His
research activity deals with the hypothesis of cognitive bio-capitalism,
basic income, and precarity issues. He is co-editor of *The Global
Economic Crisis*,

(Semiotext(e), 2011).

**David Golumbia** teaches at Virginia Commonwealth University. He is
the author of

*The Cultural Logic of Computation* (Harvard, 2009), and of many
articles on digital culture, language, linguistics, and literary
studies. He maintains the blog <http://uncomputing.org>. Golumbia is
completing a book titled *Cyberlibertarianism: The False Promise of
Digital Freedom*.

**Max Haiven** is an Assistant Professor in the Division of Art History
and Critical Studies at the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design,
Canada. He is author of *Crises of Imagination, Crises of Power* (2014),
*The Radical Imagination* (2014) with Alex Khasnabish, and *Cultures of
Financialization* (2014).

**Keith Hart** is Centennial Professor of Economic Anthropology at the
London School of Economics and International Director, the Human Economy
Program, University of Pretoria. His writings on money include ‘Heads or
tails? Two Sides of the Coin’ (1986), and *The Memory Bank: Money in an
Unequal World* (2000), available at [http://thememoryba
nk.co.uk/book/](http://thememorybank.co.uk/book/).

**Samer Hassan** is an activist and Assistant Professor at the
Universidad Complutense de Madrid. With an interdisciplinary background,
he's been researching on social networks, distributed systems, and
social simulation from positions in Spain, UK, and Lebanon. Engaged in
free/open source software, he co-founded Comunes.org and Move Commons.
Presently he's Principal Investigator in the FP7 P2Pvalue.eu project.

**Ralph Heidenreich** lives in Biberach/Riss and works as a programmer
(<http://www.ralph-heidenreich.de>).

**Stefan Heidenreich** lives in Berlin and holds a research position at
the Center for Digital Culture, Lüneburg University
(<http://www.stefanheidenreich.de>). Together with Ralph Heidenreich he
wrote the books *Mehr Geld* (1998), and *Der Preis der Welt* (2014).

**Geert Lovink** is a media theorist, internet critic and author of
*Zero Comments* (2007) and *Networks Without a Cause* (2012). From
2004-2013 he taught in the new media masters program at Media Studies,
University of Amsterdam. He is the founding director of the Institute of
Network Cultures.

**Bill Maurer** is Dean of Social Sciences and Professor of Anthropology
and Law, University of California, Irvine. He is also the Director of
the Institute for Money, Technology and Financial Inclusion. A cultural
anthropologist, he conducts research on money and finance, focusing on
the technological infrastructures and social relations of exchange and
payment.

**Pekka Piironen** a Finnish economic and strategy theorist, well known
for his theory of the collective pledge and biopolitics of firms. He is
a founding member of Robin Hood Asset Management Cooperative and the
author of *Economy of Insecurity*.

**Lena Rethel** is Associate Professor of International Political
Economy at the University of Warwick, working on financial development
and Islamic finance. Her publications include *The Problem with Banks*
(Zed Books, 2012; with Timothy J. Sinclair) and *The Everyday Political
Economy of Southeast Asia* (Cambridge University Press, 2015; with
Juanita Elias).

**Renée Ridgway** is an artist, curator, writer, and educator. Ridgway
is currently a PhD fellow at Copenhagen Business School in the
Department of Management, Philosophy and Politics in cooperation with
Leuphana University’s Digital Cultures Research Lab. Her current
research merges artistic and curatorial practice within the digital
economies.

**Andrew Ross** is a social activist and Professor of Social and
Cultural Analysis at NYU. A contributor to the Guardian, the New York
Times, the Nation, and Al Jazeera, he is the author of many books,
including *Creditocracy and the Case for Debt Refusal*, *Nice Work if
You Can Get It*, *Fast Boat to China*, *No-Collar*, and *The Celebration
Chronicles*.

**Stephanie Rothenberg**’s artworks mix physical and virtual spaces to
investigate new models of crowdsourced labor and the power dynamics
between contemporary visions of utopian urbanization and real world
economic, political and environmental factors. She is Associate
Professor at SUNY Buffalo.

**Douglas Rushkoff** is the author of *Present Shock: When Everything
Happens Now*, as well as a dozen other bestselling books on media,
technology, and culture, including *Program or Be Programmed*,

*Media Virus and Life Inc*. He lives in New York, and lectures about
media, society, and economics around the world.

**Saskia Sassen** is a Robert S. Lynd Professor of Sociology and
Co-Chair at Committee on Global Thought at Columbia University. Her
research and writing is focused on globalization (including its social,
economic and political dimensions), immigration, new-networked
technologies, and changes within the liberal state that result from
current transnational conditions
([*www.saskiasassen.com*](http://www.saskiasassen.com/)).

**Inge Ejbye Sørensen** is Lord Kelvin Adam Smith Research Fellow in
Digital Economy and Culture at Centre for Cultural Policy Research,
University of Glasgow. She is an award-winning film producer and
academic, who writes about crowdfunding, creative industries,
documentary film production, and digital distribution and delivery of
audiovisual content.

**Erin B. Taylor** is an economic anthropologist who researches money,
poverty and material culture. She is the author of *Materializing
Poverty: How the Poor Transform Their Lives*. Taylor has researched
squatting in the Dominican Republic and mobile money in Haiti. Her
current project investigates global research in consumer finance.

**Tiziana Terranova** is Associate Professor of Cultural Theory and New
Media in the Department of Human and Social Sciences at the University
of Naples 'L'Orientale'. Terranova is the author of *Network Culture:
Politics for the Information Age* and is currently writing a new book on
digital social networks to be published by University of Minnesota
Press.

**Nathaniel Tkacz** is an Assistant Professor in the Centre for
Interdisciplinary Methodologies at The University of Warwick. He writes
and researches at the intersection of digital media and politics. His
most recent book is *Wikipedia and The Politics of Openness* (The
University of Chicago Press, 2014). Further information is available at:
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/cross_fac/cim/people/academic/nathaniel-tkacz>.

**Robert van Boeschoten** is a philosopher interested in the cultural
impact of media on society at large, and organizations in particular.
His work is divided over The Polytechnic of Amsterdam (HvA) at the
Communication and Multimedia Department where he teaches future
scenarios and The University for Humanistics (UvH) in Utrecht where he
is a lecturer in organization studies.

**Pablo Velasco** is a PhD student at the University of Warwick Centre
for Interdisciplinary Methodologies. He holds an MA in Philosophy from
the National Autonomous University of Mexico. His doctoral research
focuses on the topologies and socio-political aspects of digital
currencies.

**Akseli Virtanen** is a theorist of new political finance, born in
Finland and currently based in Santa Cruz, California. He is the author
of *Arbitrary Power, Critique of Biopolitical Economy* and the editor of
*n-1 Edições*. He is a founding member of Robin Hood Asset Management
Cooperative.

**Beat Weber** studied economics at the Vienna University of Economics
and Business. He is an expert at the Division for European Affairs and
International Financial Organizations of Oesterreichische Nationalbank,
the central bank of Austria.

[flaptekst]

MoneyLab Reader

An Intervention In Digital Economy

Edited by Geert Lovink, Nathaniel Tkacz, Patricia de Vries

INC Reader \#10

MoneyLab is part of a global movement that demands the democratization
of the design of our financial futures. Audacity is essential in times
of crisis. And so we must engage constructively with hackers,
entrepreneurs and other creators who take up the call for economic
alternatives. One first step is a map of the present: What works, what
doesn’t, what is worth pursuing and what must be left aside? Which
histories are bearing on the present? And what are the limits of our
economic imagination?

The MoneyLab Reader brings developments in crowdfunding, currency
design, technologies of payment, and other economic experiments into
dialogue. The authors of this volume discuss the implications of the
current architecture of global finance, its impact on ever-growing
income disparity, and question money and finance as such. It is not
always clear, for instance, whether genuine alternatives are unfolding
or if we are simply witnessing the creative extension of neoliberalism.
At stake, however, is the full spectrum of technologies of economic
(re)distribution.

www.networkcultures.org/publications

**Contributors:**

Irwan Abdalloh, Franco Berardi, Finn Brunton, Paolo Cirio, Jim Costanzo,
Primavera De Filippi , Eduard de Jong, Irina Enache, Andrea Fumagalli,
David Golumbia, Max Haiven, Keith Hart, Samer Hassan, Ralph Heidenreich,
Stefan Heidenreich, Geert Lovink, Bill Maurer, Rachel O’Dwyer, Pekka
Piironen, Lena Rethel, Renée Ridgway, Andrew Ross, Stephanie Rothenberg,
Douglas Rushkoff , Saskia Sassen, Inge Ejbye Sørensen, Erin B. Taylor,
Tiziana Terranova, Nathaniel Tkacz, Robert van Boeschoten, Pablo
Velasco, Akseli Virtanen, Beat Weber.

**Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam 2015**

ISBN 978-90-822345-5-8

[Logo’s: ]

INC | HvA | Warwick University | Amsterdam Creative Industries Network |
