# **Introduction to the MoneyLab Reader\
\
**By Geert Lovink and Nathaniel Tkacz

# 

The best way to rob a bank is to design a currency – Johan Sjerpstra

Welcome to MoneyLab, a network of artists, activists and researchers,
founded in 2013 by the Amsterdam-based Institute of Network Cultures;
its aim is to research, discuss, and experiment with (alternative)
internet-related revenue models in the arts and beyond. The initial
MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives conference was organised in March 2014 in
Amsterdam and focussed on the Bitcoin debate, first steps in
crowdfunding research, mobile money in Africa and beyond, and artistic
responses to the 2008 global financial crisis, on-going recession,
foreclosures and insolvencies. This reader can in part be read as the
proceedings of this event (the program of the conference is included in
the back of this publication). In our text ‘Friends with Money’[^1],
included in the *Disrupting Business: Art and Activism in Times of
Financial Crisis* anthology, we have laid out the programmatic
intentions of our interventionist research. We’re not going to repeat
that here. Instead, we want to go through a few key developments and
identify touchstone authors in the MoneyLab *umfeld*. We conclude with
the outlook of MoneyLab two years into the project and reassess the
relation between experimentation-innovation and radical critique, inside
and outside academia.

MoneyLab begins when network cultures and their corporate counterparts
come to see the network as generative of new economic forms. Money is no
longer a given, coming from outside. Currency, tokens, ‘wallets’ and
technologies of payment are all fair game, all up for grabs. The
spectacle of Bitcoin has drawn everyone’s attention, but the
heavyweights – Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Samsung, etc. – have
also been busy reimagining themselves as financial services and payment
providers for the platformed masses.

Meanwhile, the networked subjects are left to their devices, having to
generate revenue themselves and create something out of nothing, from
zero to one. Neoliberal subjects find themselves in permanent start-up
mode. In times of advanced stagnation we can neither count on subsidies,
nor investments provided by the traditional world of finance. Welcome to
digital realism. The 99% have all become survival artists in our
austerity networks, subjected to rolling crises amidst never-ending
economic decline. The search for new modes of value extraction
intensifies. The latest ubiquitous technology is financialization
itself. In this not so brave new world, conflict risks being superseded
by competing economic visions articulated through software. Destroy the
system! Bitcoin or Ripple?

The content potlatch is over. You can share – but who cares? The copy is
neither the problem nor the solution and tends to postpone rather than
speed-up the decisions ahead. The classic distinction between the
idealistic hacker and the opportunistic start-up entrepreneur has
started to blur. It is no longer clear whether genuine alternatives are
unfolding, or we are simply witnessing creative destruction without a
cause. Disruption has become an aim in itself. What will we pitch?
Dunno? How about potato salad?[^2]

We used to take for granted that money circulates, but now we are forced
to invent it, time and again. The Lab is our creative jail. No solution
coming from here will ever become sustainable: we are locked-up in a mad
house of temporary standards for ‘additional’ sources of income.
Additional to what? many of us will ask ourselves. Will the tiny revenue
streams ever swell, or will they remain as erratic as the global
weather? Can micropayments ever create a New Renaissance or should we be
more realistic? Shouldn’t we combine the desire for new revenue models
with a demand to redistribute income?

Let’s scan the future spectrum of technologies of (re)distribution. You
have been signed up for the *network economicus*: the internet
reconfigured as a suite of financial services, as a space for conducting
and intensifying financial selves – entrepreneurs, funders, venturers,
exchangers, and of course, debtors. *Network economicus* presents an
archipelago of platform economies. Google, Apple, Facebook, Twitter—all
working to harness the lock-in effects of social ties in order to
generate and extract value from routine economic activities beyond the
service/data-profile/advertising complex.

Could it be that the real killer app of the net has been uniformly
overlooked? We are talking, of course, of internet banking. Imagine how
different the frontier mentality of earlier phases of ‘new media’ would
look if it paid serious attention to net banking. There is no community,
no collaboration, no anonymous exploration of multiple selves. It never
took place in a virtual world and is in no way progressive. Instead we
see user accounts linked to real identities supported by hard
documentation. These are websites that function to support utterly
mundane financial tasks. Security, of selves and of the general
infrastructure, is a central concern. The goal of the net banking
experience is seamless functionality and ease of transfer, devoid of any
unforeseen potentiality, where financial subjectivity is quietly
fostered through the routine browsing, clicking and scrolling through of
one’s meaningful numbers.

Large portions of the web have now been recast in this imagining of
internet banking. But the converse is also true. Contemporary banking is
folding in the logics of personalisation, recommendation and
advertising, and is starting to borrow from design techniques pioneered
in social media and other commercial platforms. In England, for example,
online statements are now riddled with promotional material, which are
derived from their clients spending and purchase histories. User
accounts now come with money management dashboards that categorise and
visualise spending and saving habits, or lack thereof. And, of course,
the banks are in on the data profiling game.

In the U.S., the East-West division of powers is shifting. The visions
and aspirations of Wall Street and Silicon Valley are merging. Start-ups
are now looking to innovate at the level of money, payment and funding,
while financial companies innovate through technology. Finance is
increasingly where the geeks end up: mathematical modelers, machine
learning experts, physics majors and so on. Increasingly, their target
is the ‘data flows’ of social media and related platforms. Front-end
financialization of the web coincides with the discovery that the web
can be used as a financial resource. Wikipedia page edits can be used to
predict stock movements. Social media platforms are machine-readable and
the content of these ‘flows’ is reflected in fluctuating stock values.
The hacking of the Associated Press Twitter account in April 2013 showed
all too well the new volatilities of finance when it becomes subject to
the status update. MoneyLab takes place within this layering of
financial techniques and technologies. Some of these developments are
beyond reach, but we must not fear finance as such. This point has been
made most clearly by financial activist Brett Scott, who contributed to
the MoneyLab conference. Scott’s technique is to approach the world of
finance through the mindset of the hacker. We might equally ask what
other strategies of engagement are possible?

Historically, the MoneyLab project can be situated as one of the many
post-global financial crisis initiatives that emerged after the global
uprisings of 2011, in particular Occupy. In a sense, Occupy was not
enough about Wall Street and was too inward looking at the internal
dynamics of becoming a movement in the 21st century. Occupy showed not
only how mainstream the discontent of global finance was, but also
demonstrated the need for alternative views on money, capital, income
and finance. MoneyLab emerged a few years into the Bitcoin craze and
similar cryptocurrency experiments. Early days wherever you looked.
That’s the spirit of MoneyLab. The critique of global finance is there
but is still waiting for its own ‘Piketty’ moment. There is a growing
awareness of 'dark pools' and other absurdities (thanks to Scott
Peterson[^3] and the pop literature of Michael Lewis[^4]), but how can
all this evidence be turned into an organised outrage or even be
translated into policy? Many of us fear that regulation alone will not
do the job. It is not enough to decommission this or that financial
tool. Besides a General Theory of Global Finance for the 21st Century,
we also need blueprints for how money should be generated in this age of
digital networks.\
\
MoneyLab talks strategy. In his book *The Quants*, Scott Patterson
discusses proposals to ban quants from Wall Street. To him ‘that would
be tantamount to banishing civil engineers from the bridge-making
profession after a bridge collapse. Instead, many believed the goal
should be to design better bridges – or, in the case of the quants, more
robust models that could withstand financial tsunamis, not create
them.’[^5] But what's better ‘design’ in the age of algo wars? Is
Bitcoin the better bridge? What does it mean to improve systems when we
have reached the end of the liberal market illusion? There will always
be ‘new insiders’. Will it be Apple, Google and Facebook this time? Or
should we expect the telcos to become the new banks?\
\
In her 2014 book *Expulsions*, Saskia Sassen points to the Theatre of
Cruelty, the neoliberal revenge on the poor, as a result of the 2008
financial crisis. In terms of strategy, this is always good to keep in
mind: there are hidden costs, there is a long-term fall out. The
autonomy of the ‘money that went to heaven’ is relative. As we know from
our own youth: not even a game of Monopoly is innocent and without
consequences.\
\
Philip Mirowski’s *Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste* from 2013
asks the simple but hard question: how did the neoliberals emerge from
the crisis stronger than ever? The MoneyLab project should at least open
up this line of critique. What if all these well-meant, constructive
alternatives only strengthen neoliberal policies and benefit the
parasitic 1%? Or worse, what if the very alternatives proposed are
themselves somehow neoliberal? Should we go on an alternatives strike
and even refuse to formulate any form of criticism? What’s the deadliest
form of negativity in the world of finance? The questions Mirowski asks
eventually culminate in the organisation issue of the adversaries. On
the positive side, initiatives such as MoneyLab can also come together
in an organized network and eventually flip into a Thought Collective
(as Mirowski calls it), a global initiative that can review and
distribute alternatives seeds. He asks, ‘What would a vital counter
narrative to the epistemological commitments of the neoliberals look
like?’[^6] Can we be so bold and answer: MoneyLab? Or would that be
premature? If the ‘major ambition of the Neoliberal Thought Collective
is to sow doubt and ignorance amongst the populace,’ what role can
internet-based research networks such as MoneyLab play? Is it enough to
emphasize the mix of radical critique and concept development? If, as
Mirowski states, ‘true political power resides in the ability to make
the decision to “suspend” the market in order to save the market,’ is it
enough for opposite forces to uncool entrepreneurial myths and break the
spell of the unchallenged capitalist consensus? Is our Decision a purely
semiologic one?\
\
So far the left has mainly defended mid-20th century models of the
welfare state and demanded the redistribution of money, instead of
considering the radical reinvention of money itself. Alternative,
complimentary and local currencies have remained at the margins. It is
one thing to conclude that the think-tank model itself is an outmoded
organisational form to do research and make policy. The professionalism
of the NGO model is too dull, too slow for this fast-moving world of
continuous events, wars, climate disasters and political ruptures. In
this light Mirowski asks the 1000 Bitcoin question: ‘Is there a coherent
alternative framework within which to understand the interaction of the
financialization of the economy with larger ebbs and flows of political
economy in the global transformations of capitalism?’ One possible
direction that needs to be discussed is the issue of the
financialization from below. So far, financialization has only been
understood as a move from trade and commodity production to profits from
financial channels.[^7] Is the monetisation of services that were once
free of cost (or that did not exist in the first place) changing this
picture?\
\
Are initiatives such as MoneyLab ready for the ‘exception’ and the
financial state of emergency as predicted by websites such as Zero Hedge
and RT celebrities such as Max Keiser?[^8] Do we, unconsciously,
underestimate the urgency of the current situation? According to
Mirowski this is precisely what defines the behaviour of financial
elites: they know how to get ready for the next crash. ‘Neoliberals may
preach the rule of law, and sneer in public about the ineptitude of
government, but they win by taking advantage of “the exception” to
introduce components of their program unencumbered by judicial or
democratic accountability. They know what it means to never let a
serious crisis go to waste.’ Are we ready? Are efforts to collectively
imagine alternative, internet-based revenue models, for instance for the
arts, ready to operate after the Great Collapse?

The MoneyLab reader brings developments in crowdfunding, digital and
crypto currency, mobile money services, technologies of payment and
other economic experiments into dialogue. It is naïve to see them as
unrelated or to dismiss them offhand. Now more than ever we need
constructive engagement with the hackers, entrepreneurs and other
creators of economic alternatives. Audaciousness in times austerity.
First, though, we need a map of the present: What works and what
doesn’t? What is worth pursuing and what must be left aside? What tips
the dominant ideology? Which histories are bearing on the present? And
what are the limits of our own economic imagination?

## References

Harrison, Kate. “Crowdfunding Potato Salad: Funny or Insulting?”,
*Forbes*, 08/08/2014,
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kateharrison/2014/08/08/crowdfunding-potato-salad-funny-or-insulting/>.

Lewis, Michael. *Flash Boys, A Wall Street Revolt*, New York: W.W.Norton
& Co., 2014.

Lovink, Geert and Nathaniel Tkacz. ‘Data Browser, Autonomedia,’ 2013, p.
175-191. See also:
http://networkcultures.org/moneylab/about/background/.

Philip Mirowski, *Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste*, London: Verso
Books, 2013.

Patterson, Scott. *Dark Pools, The Rise of A.I. trading machines and the
looming threat to Wall Street*, New York: Random House, 2012.

[^1]: Geert Lovink and Nate Tkacz, Data Browser, Autonomedia, 2013, p.
    175-191. See also:
    http://networkcultures.org/moneylab/about/background/.

[^2]: Kate Harrison, ‘Crowdfunding Potato Salad: Funny or Insulting?’,
    *Forbes*, 08/08/2014,
    http://www.forbes.com/sites/kateharrison/2014/08/08/crowdfunding-potato-salad-funny-or-insulting/

[^3]: Scott Patterson, *Dark Pools, The Rise of A.I. trading machines
    and the looming threat to Wall Street*, Random House, New York,
    2012.

[^4]: Michael Lewis, *Flash Boys, A Wall Street Revolt*, W.W.Norton &
    Co., New York, 2014.

[^5]: Scott Patterson, *The Quants*, p. 318.

[^6]: Philip Mirowski, *Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste*, 2013,
    p. 356.

[^7]: Costas Lapavitsas, Profiling Without Producing, How Finance
    Exploits Us All, Verso, London/New York, 2013, p. 138.

[^8]: See [http://www.zerohedge.com/](styles.xml) and
    http://rt.com/shows/keiser-report/.

