---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Playability and the Search for an Open Source Economy

### Douglas Rushkoff {.author}

> You can’t compete with a monopoly by playing the game by the
> monopolist’s rules. The monopoly has the resources, the distribution
> channels, the R&D resources; in short, they just have too many
> strengths. You compete with a monopoly by changing the rules of the
> game into a set that favors your strengths.[^1]
> 
> – John R. Young, founder of SourceForge, the world’s largest provider
> of hosting for Open Source development projects.

Approaching the market as a game allows us to challenge the inherent
biases of centralized currency and monopolies as rules of a game.[^2]
The rules are not inherent to the medium; they are agreements and
impositions of laws that favor the people who put them in place. The
landscape itself is tilted towards certain players and away from others,
and every medium of exchange contains its biases. The biases of the
market economy, which are consistently upheld by scientists,
technologists, and economists, are scarcity and competition. But these
biases can be addressed and redefined through the playability of the
medium.

From language to Facebook to the commercial market, these tools rely on
a continual agreement to the social contract of the game, i.e.
acceptance of the biases and adherence to the rules. However, beyond
simply strategizing how to ‘win’ in the given rule set of the commercial
marketplace, players may also attain the ability to take charge of the
game and rewrite the rules themselves – thus redefining the biases.[^3]
This means moving beyond a culture of media production to a culture of
rule production, changing roles from content makers acting within the
structure to programmers acting upon the structure. It is exactly these
rules of the game, who has access to them, who is able to write, to
edit, to hack, to play, that make all the difference.

Play is characterized by both freedom and constraints. Players are first
aware of their freedom to choose whether or not to play.[^4] Players are
also aware of the guiding rules of play, including boundaries such as
physical demarcations, time constraints, and behavioral procedures.[^5]
From this, we can define ‘playability’ as a metric for how much play a
medium or game allows, as well as a person’s or society’s capacity for
interactivity and agency. Playability is comprehension of the rules of a
game and freedom to participate or opt out. Assessing the playability of
a medium such as the market economy allows for a new measure of access
to the medium itself.

In terms of playability, the net offers people the opportunity to build
economies based on different rules – commerce that exists outside the
economic map that is mistaken for the territory of human interaction.
Entrepreneurs can start and even scale companies with little or no
money, making the banks and investment capital on which business once
depended obsolete. (I have argued in talks and papers that this was the
real reason for the so-called economic crisis: there is less of a market
for the debt on which the top-heavy game is based.)[^6] People can
develop local and complementary currencies,[^7] barter networks,[^8] and
other exchange systems independently of a central bank, and carry out
secure transactions with smart phones using add-ons and applications.

There were once other kinds of money with very different slopes to them.
In fact, throughout history, we find some of the most highly prosperous
peoples using more than one currency at a time. It’s only when they are
conquered by a centralized regime, usually from a great distance, that
their regional currency systems are outlawed in favor of a single coin
of the realm. Then, prosperity drains from the newly conquered territory
to the center, in a monolithic fiscal scheme more like the one in use
today.

From about the 10th through the 13th century – the Age of Cathedrals, as
it was once called – most of Europe enjoyed two main kinds of currency:
centralized money, used for long distance transactions, and local
currency for daily transactions.[^9] Local currency worked very
differently from centralized currency. Instead of being issued by a
central bank, it was quite literally worked into existence, accurately
reflecting the bounty produced. And because of the peculiar bias of this
money, the people who used it were among the most prosperous working
classes ever.[^10]

During this time period, a farmer would reap his harvest and bring it to
a grain store. The grain-store operator would then hand the farmer a
receipt, indicating the amount of grain, wine, or other commodity he was
storing on the farmer’s behalf. This receipt then served as money. In
ancient Egypt, where this practice was first introduced, the receipt was
a shard of pottery – an ostracon – that could be broken into pieces as
the farmer ‘spent’ the grain stored in his name.[^11] In the Middle
Ages, the money was mostly made of precious metal banged into thin foil
coins – *brakteaten* – which could be torn into smaller segments.[^12]
This local coinage was not saved for long periods, because it didn’t
earn any interest. In fact, the longer it was kept, the less it was
worth.

We can reframe this analysis in the language of media ecology,[^13] that
is, by studying these transactions as carriers of meaning, with impact
and influence on a larger, more complex and shifting media environment.
By doing so, we see why the bias of local currency was not toward saving
but toward spending. Hoarding money meant losing value, so everyone
sought to get rid of his money before the next recoinage. Capital meant
nothing if it wasn’t actively invested. People put their money to work
maintaining their equipment, building windmills, improving their wine
presses, and so on. The fact that the currency cost money encouraged
people to think of other ways to create value over time. In the Age of
Cathedrals, even small towns invested in tremendous architectural
projects to generate tourism spending by pilgrims. Cathedrals were not
funded by the Vatican Bank, they were local, bottom-up investments made
by farmers and other laborers on behalf of future generations.[^14]

Like their Middle Ages forebears, the founders of the open source
movement were looking primarily to set standards through which a
community could invest in its own future. At its most fundamental, open
source simply requires that the code on which software runs be freely
available to anyone. This transparency invites innovation and growth by
allowing anyone to build upon existing software programs. ‘Open Source
began as an attempt to preserve a culture of sharing and only later led
to an expanded awareness of the value of that sharing.’[^15] Open source
did not invent these behaviors but it seeks to maintain them in a way
that benefits the individuals involved in creating value, those
benefiting off their creations, and the greater good yet to be defined.

The open source model was developed at the close of the 20th century by
computer software engineers, motivated by genuine fears that innovation
would be hindered as increasing commercial capital was invested into the
development of their science.[^16] The creativity that was necessary to
drive growth in their fairly young field of inquiry could be
definitively and swiftly cut short if it had to take place within the
closed, competitive climate of proprietary commercial software
development. Instead of seeking standards, sharing innovations, and
building on each other’s successes, engineers in a proprietary scheme
would be required to keep secrets, to re-invent one another’s
advancements, and be denied the benefit of working together on the same
problems.

For the programmers, open source served as a code of business ethics.
While individual people and companies could still package and sell the
fruits of open source labor, the underlying code was a shared resource
that anyone could utilize. So while the Linux operating system might be
free to anyone, an individual developer could create a particularly
simple installation disk for it, and charge whatever he pleased. The
Linux operating system itself was developed in a culture that combined
collaboration with independent, autonomous development.[^17] Many
technologists and businesspeople alike were awed by the technologies and
the profits this seemingly new model of collaboration engendered – from
Linux to Mozilla and Redhat to Firefox. It was not long before open
source was acknowledged as ‘the natural language of a networked
community’[^18] which ‘nobody owns, everybody can use and anybody can
improve.’[^19]

The success of open source as a programming methodology became the
inspiration for its application across a wide number of fields. How many
other cultural institutions might benefit from engaging their
communities in collective, shared production? My own books, from *Open
Source Democracy* to *Nothing Sacred: The Case for Open Source
Religion*, looked at the application of the open source ethos to
government and religion, which I believed to be suffering from insider
cultures and lack of access. Even pro-corporate *Wired* magazine ran
pieces such as ‘Open Source Everywhere’[^20] and ‘Collaborative
Culture’, suggesting that the proprietary way of doing things may have
run its course.[^21]

However, open source ideology is most practically aligned with economic
theory. Open source means more people creating and contributing value
and ultimately invested in the resulting outcome. It creates new markets
by competing against under-consumption and non-consumption. And as seen
in the case of Netscape/Firefox vs. Microsoft Explorer, open source can
be used to break up monopolies while still allowing individuals to
participate in a system of value exchange. It reflects a business more
concerned with sustainability in the long term, treating its users as
equivalent stakeholders, as investors, rather than prioritizing short
term or exponential growth. As Eric Raymond eloquently argued, open
source is the ethos of the bottom-up bazaar.[^22]

For now, however, we must acknowledge the fact that what playability the
net might offer in this regard is not generally embraced or
acknowledged. Yes, bloggers and YouTubers have had many successes,
particularly against government. They have brought down a Republican
senator, an attorney general, and even made headway against the
repressive net censorship of the Chinese. WikiLeaks has released
thousands of documents much to the consternation of the US government,
and the people of Egypt and Syria have utilized technologies as
corporate-driven as Facebook to organize resistance to repressive
regimes. YouTube not only embarrassed then-candidate Barack Obama about
his minister’s race-toned rants; it also exposed political repression in
Myanmar and FEMA incompetence in New Orleans.

But this activity is occurring on a platform that has almost nothing to
do with the commons. The internet may have been first developed with
public dollars, but it is now a private utility. We create content using
expensive consumer technologies and then upload it to corporate-owned
servers using corporate-owned conduits, usually for a fee. More
significantly, we are doing all this with software made by corporations
whose interests are embedded in its very code. Maybe this is why
governments, and rarely corporations, are the ultimate targets of most
internet activism.

While examples exist, most resistance to corporatism still occurs on the
bigger stage, created and dominated by the corporate players,
themselves. The unique potential of interactive technologies to
undermine the dominance of the single, ‘closed source’ reality of the
corporate-sponsored spectacle is left untapped. Instead, the media
environment informing resistance and would-be extra-corporate activity
is that of television and other closed source, top-down media. Speaking
‘truth to power’ seems more important than sharing truth with one
another.

Meanwhile, the decentralizing effect of new media promised by the likes
of Tim O’Reilly and John Batelle in prominent essays such as ‘Web
Squared’[^23] has been met by an overwhelming concentration of corporate
conglomeration. New web companies are purchased by giants like Google,
Facebook, and Microsoft as much for the programmers working within them
as for whatever decentralized technologies they might be
developing.[^24] As a result, whatever visions or agendas these
programmers may have had for starting their companies in the first place
are subsumed by the conglomerates who acquire them, and their
programming abilities are applied to wholly different projects.[^25]

As a result, when a potentially destabilizing and decentralizing
technology or principle such as shareware, viral media, or open source
emerges, this half-true and half-hearted style of inquiry follows the
story only until a means to arrest its development is discovered and new
strategies may be offered. Like a radical garage band discovered by a
record label, anything radical is neutralized before the CD gets to the
mall.[^26]

The open source ethos, through which anyone who understands the code can
effectively redesign a program to his own liking, is repackaged by
culture guru Jeff Howe as ‘crowdsourcing’[^27] through which
corporations can once again harness the tremendous potential of real
people acting in concert, for free. My own concept of ‘viral media’[^28]
is reinvented by Malcolm Gladwell as ‘social contagion’, or Tim Draper
as ‘viral marketing’ – techniques through which mass marketers can once
again define human choice as a series of consumer decisions. My other
main contribution to culture studies, the notion of ‘social currency
through which people develop non-monetary value’,[^29] is now the name
for an American Express Card rewards program: ‘The Social Currency’. The
decentralizing bias of new media is thus accepted and interpolated only
until the market’s intellectual guard or hired marketers can devise a
new countermeasure for their patrons to employ on behalf of preserving
business as usual.

Indeed, the internet might pose a threat to both centralized media and
centralized value creation. But the dominance of the corporatist system,
the triumph of the corporatist spectacle, as well as the legacy of a
central currency operating system, has limited the thinking of most net
theorists and economists. In short, without a media ecological
framework, these practitioners remain woefully unaware of the contexts
defining their activity.

The self-styled revolutionary ‘net economics’ of these internet authors
are in fact reactionary responses well within the boundaries defined by
their corporate patrons. Instead of imagining genuinely participatory or
peer-to-peer possibilities, they simply offer new ways for companies and
individuals to participate in the status quo corporatist economy.

The muting of the net’s greater potential for playability reduces it
from a peer-to-peer medium back to something more like a broadcast
medium, at least insofar as its potential to shift the relationship of
people to the corporations with and through which they transact and make
meaning. True playability involves access to the playing field itself,
and even the ability to rewrite those rules or transcend the game
altogether.

The crucial capacity of the internet to introduce increased playability
to the corporatist system will depend on the public’s willingness to
embrace the new demands of the internet environment. On the internet,
this means learning the languages through which rules of interaction are
written, protocols are established, and technologies are either opened
or closed to participation. By extension, this applies as well to the
cultural software and operating systems defining our participation in
the public sphere and marketplace alike. The public must not only
achieve a base level of computer and media literacy, but we must also
become aware of the way that media and technology create environments,
and how we can participate in this process – or at least become more
conscious of the media ecology in which we are functioning as a first
step toward an alternative to corporatism.

## References

Berger, Frank. *Die Mittelalterlichen Brakteaten im Kestner-Museum,
Hannover 2,* Hannover: Teil, 1996.

Carse, James P. *Finite & Infinite Games: A Vision of Life in Play and
Possibility,* New York: Free Press, 1986.

Frank, Thomas. *The Conquest of Cool,* Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1997.

Glas, René. *Games of Stake: Control, Agency and Ownership in World of
Warcraft,* PhD diss., Amsterdam: Faculty of Humanities, University of
Amsterdam, 2010.

Goetz, Thomas. ‘Open Source Everywhere’*, Wired*, November 2003,
<http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.11/opensource.html>.

Howe, Jeff. ‘The Rise of Crowd Sourcing’, *Wired*, June 2006.

Lietaer, Bernard A. and Stephen M. Belgin. *Of Human Wealth: Beyond
Greed & Scarcity,* Boulder, CO: Human Wealth Books and Talks, 2004.

Huizinga, Johan. *Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture,*
Boston: Beacon Press, 1971.

De Mul, Jos. ‘The Game of Life: Narrative and Ludic Identity Formation
in Computer Games,’ in Joost Raessnes and Jeffrey Goldstein (eds)
*Handbook of Computer Game Studies*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005.

Lietaer, Bernard. *The Mystery of Money: Beyond Greed and Scarcity,*
Munich: Riemann Verlag, 2000.

O’ Reilly, Tim. ‘The Open Source Paradigm Shift,’ in Chris DiBona,
Danese Cooper and Mark Stone (eds) *Open Sources 2.0,* Sebastopol:
O'Reilly, 2006.

O’ Reilly, Tim and John Battelle. ‘Web Squared: Web 2.0 Five Years On.’
*Web 2.0 Summit*, 10 October 2009,
<http://www.web2summit.com/web2009/public/schedule/detail/10194>.

Postman Neil and Charles Weingartner. *Teaching As a Subversive
Activity,* New York: Delacorte Press, 1969.

Raymond, Eric S. *Cathedral and Bazaar,* Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly, 2001.

Rosoff, Matt. ‘Google’s 15 Biggest Acquisitions And What Happened To
Them Read More’, *Business Insider*, 14 March 2011,

Rushkoff, Douglas. *Get Back in the Box,* New York: Collins, 2005.

Rushkoff, Douglas. *Media Virus.* New York: Ballantine Books, 1994.

Searls, Doc and David Weinberger. ‘World of Ends: What the Internet Is
and How to Stop Mistaking It for Something Else, 10 March 2003,
<http://worldofends.com>.

Wolk, D. ‘Future of Open Source: Collaborative Culture’*, Wired*, June
2009,
<http://www.wired.com/dualperspectives/article/news/2009/06/dp_opensource_wired0616>.

Young, Robert. ‘Giving it Away: How Red Hat Software Stumbled Across a
New Economic Model and Helped Improve an Industry’, in Chris DiBona, Sam
Ockman, and Mark Stone (eds) *Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source
Revolution,* Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 1999.

[^1]: Robert Young, ‘Giving it Away: How Red Hat Software Stumbled
    Across a New Economic Model and Helped Improve an Industry’, in
    Chris DiBona, Sam Ockman, and Mark Stone (eds) *Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution,* Sebastopol, Ca.: O’ Reilly, 1999,
    p. 118.

[^2]: Jos de Mul, ‘The Game of Life: Narrative and Ludic Identity
    Formation in Computer Games’, Joost Raessens and Jeffrey Goldstein
    (eds) *Handbook of Computer Game Studies*, Cambridge: MIT Press,
    2005.

[^3]: James P. Carse, *Finite & Infinite Games: A Vision of Life in Play
    and Possibility,* New York: Free Press, 1986; René Glas, *Games of
    Stake: Control, Agency and Ownership in World of Warcraft,* PhD
    diss., Faculty of Humanities, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
    2010; Douglas Rushkoff, *Get Back in the Box,* New York: Collins,
    2005.

[^4]: Johan Huizinga, *Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in
    Culture,* Boston: Beacon Press, 1971, p. 7.

[^5]: Carse, *Finite & Infinite Games*, 1986, p. 9.

[^6]: See Rushkoff, 2009.

[^7]: Carse, *Finite & Infinite Games*, 1986.

[^8]: See [http://www.itex.com](http://www.itex.com).

[^9]: Bernard Lietaer, *The Mystery of Money: Beyond Greed and
    Scarcity,* Munich: Riemann Verlag, 2000, p. 183.

[^10]: Bernard Lietaer and Stephen M. Belgin, *Of Human Wealth: Beyond
    Greed &* *Scarcity,* Boulder, CO: Human Wealth Books and Talks,
    2004, p. 104.

[^11]: Lietaer, *The Mystery of Money*, 2000, p. 88.

[^12]: Frank Berger, *Die Mittelalterlichen Brakteaten im
    Kestner-Museum, Hannover 2,* Hannover: Teil, 1996, p. 9.

[^13]: Neil Postman and Charles Weingartner, *Teaching As a Subversive
    Activity,* New York: Delacorte Press, 1969.

[^14]: Lietaer, *The Mystery of Money*, p. 145.

[^15]: Tim O’ Reilly, ‘The Open Source Paradigm Shift’, in Chris DiBona,
    Danese Cooper, and Mark Stone (eds) *Open Sources 2.0,* Sebastopol,
    CA: O’ Reilly, 2006, p. 255.

[^16]: For the history of Open Source, told by an assortment of its
    early participants, see DiBona, Ockman and Stone, 1999.

[^17]: As well as a central, overseeing arbiter meant to stand in for
    the user and judge the contributions of the many.

[^18]: O’ Reilly, ‘Open Source’ 2006, p. 260.

[^19]: Doc Searls and David Weinberger, ‘World of Ends What the Internet
    Is and How to Stop Mistaking It for Something Else’, 10 March 2003,
    [http://worldofends.com](http://worldofends.com).

[^20]: Thomas Goetz, ‘Open Source Everywhere*’, Wired*, November 2003,
    [http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.11/opensource.html](http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/11.11/opensource.html).

[^21]: D. Wolk, ‘Future of Open Source: Collaborative Culture’*, Wired*
    (June 2009):
    [http://www.wired.com/dualperspectives/article/news/2009/06/dp\_opensource\_wired0616](http://www.wired.com/dualperspectives/article/news/2009/06/dp\_opensource\_wired0616).

[^22]: Eric S. Raymond, *Cathedral and Bazaar,* Cambridge, MA: O’
    Reilly, 2001.

[^23]: Tim O’Reilly and John Battelle, ‘Web Squared: Web 2.0 Five Years
    On’, *Web 2.0 Summit,* 10 October 2009,
    [http://www.web2summit.com/web2009/public/schedule/detail/10194](http://www.web2summit.com/web2009/public/schedule/detail/10194)

[^24]: Matt Rosoff, ‘Google’s 15 Biggest Acquisitions and What Happened
    to Them’, *Business Insider,* 14 March 2011,
    http://www.businessinsider.com/googles-15-biggest-acquisitions-and-what-happened-to-them-2011-3?op=1&IR=T.

[^25]: As just one example, the purchase of Dodgeball by Google in 2005.

[^26]: Thomas Frank, *The Conquest of Cool,* Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1997.

[^27]: Jeff Howe, ‘The Rise of Crowd Sourcing’, *Wired*, June 2006.

[^28]: Douglas Rushkoff, *Media Virus.* New York: Ballantine Books,
    1994.

[^29]: Rushkoff, *Get Back in the Box*, 2005, p. 78.
