---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Accumulation and Resistance in the 21st Century

### Andrew Ross {.author}

Thanks to Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez, a lot of attention has been
focused recently on wealth accumulation at the top. The income data they
have gathered shows that the primary source of accumulation for the 1
percent now comes in the form of economic rents (from debt-leveraging,
capital gains, manipulation of paper claims through derivatives, and
other forms of financial engineering).[^1] The corresponding
accumulation of household debt (you can’t have one without the other)
has been neglected, however, despite evidence that it continues to
increase, posing a threat to the capacity of democracies to protect
their citizenry from economic harms imposed by the creditor class.[^2]

For a while, there seemed to be some good news on this front. Overall
household debt was on the decrease from its sky-high levels just before
the financial crash. In the U.S., debt service, which reached more than
14 percent of after-tax income by the end of 2007, had fallen to 10.5
percent by April 2013.[^3] Much of the deleveraging was due to low
interest rates, and to a reduction in mortgage debt, though it is not
clear how much of the decrease came from banks writing off delinquent
loans rather than from faithful repayment. In the third quarter of 2013,
this decline ended, and mortgage debt started to rise again, by \$56
billion. The fourth quarter showed a 1.9 percent leap in mortgages and
3.9 percent in non-housing household debt. Auto loans and credit card
balances also started to move upward, and the trend continued through
the first quarter of 2014, with an advance of 1.1 percent, taking
overall U.S. household debt to \$11.65 trillion. Similar figures were
recorded for most of the industrialized economies, though none could
compare with the U.S.’s outlier figures on the student debt burden,
which has not abated at all in the six years since 2008, and is now
approaching 1.3 trillion, with default rates averaging a million a year.

If these numbers continue to rise, as it seems likely, then it’s clear
that the bottom of the debt deflation trend turned out to be not very
deep. Once people are persuaded it is safe to start borrowing again,
then interest rates will be hiked – an invitation for the banks to stop
hoarding their cash reserves and embark on a new season of predatory
lending. This invitation to the banks is backed by the proven
willingness of governments to bail them out even in the face of high
rates of personal default and mass immiseration among the citizenry.
Such assurances that the banks will always be made whole are critical to
any creditor’s calculation that higher levels of debt service are
sustainable. The gap between the deflated bottom and projected, or
aspirational, levels of rent extraction is now large enough for them to
jump back into the lending game, an outcome that no amount of
quantitative easing has been able to bring about.

Equally serviceable is the gathering consensus among economists – even
those critical of neoliberalism – that the so-called ‘debt overhang’
from the 2008 crash has largely been resolved and that it is not only
safe to begin borrowing again but also it is necessary if GDP-driven
growth is to get back to business as usual. This is not particularly
good analysis nor is it good advice. A debt overhang is one of these
dodgy concepts economists use to rationalize an otherwise unsustainable
or high-risk condition. And as for GDP-driven growth, all the evidence
shows that any such economic program is a recipe for ecological
collapse.

## Rise of Creditocracy

Today we live in the kind of society – I call it a creditocracy – where
pretty much everybody is up to their neck in debt that can never be
repaid, nor is supposed to be.

The gut liberal response is to say, ‘That’s not fair, no one should have
debts that can never be repaid, and besides, why would banks want that?’
This is to miss the point entirely. It’s important to understand that
our creditors don’t want us to pay off our debts entirely – for the same
reason that credit card issuers don’t want us to pay off our credit card
balance every month. Customers who do this diligently are known in the
industry as ‘deadbeats’, because they appear to get credit for free. The
ideal citizens in a creditocracy are the revolvers who cannot make ends
meet, and who pay the minimum along with merchant fees and penalties
every month, rolling over their credit from month to month.

Creditors’ profits come from extending our debt service as long as they
possibly can. After all, if we pay down our debts, we are no longer
serviceable to the banks. The goal is to keep us on the hook until we
die, and even beyond the grave in the case of student debts that are
co-signed by parents or grandparents. Not surprisingly, there has been a
marked generational shift in the debt burden toward the elderly. In the
postwar model of life-cycle lending, it was more or less assumed that
middle-class borrowers would earn the right, in their senior years, to
live debt-free, and it was a source of pride among the elderly,
especially debt-abhorrent Depression babies, to have never paid a
finance fee. That is no longer the case, and not just because
debt-tolerant boomers have entered the ranks of the retired. Patterns of
capitalist profit have shifted, and are more tied to lifelong financial
extraction.

The major banks are bigger and more profitable than before the 2008
crash. The exposure of American banks to derivatives alone has increased
to \$232 trillion, almost a third more than before 2008 when the
escalation of these risky bets helped to bring on the financial crash.
The big six U.S. banks collectively are carrying a debt load of \$8.7
trillion. With that combination of debt overhead, exposure to dodgy
derivatives, leverage over the national economy, and continued weak
regulatory oversight, there is a very high risk of a repeat of the 2008
meltdown. Indeed, many industry insiders believe that an equally ruinous
relapse is already in the making. Legislators are all but powerless to
bring the banks to heel. U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder himself
acknowledged publicly last year in testimony to the Senate Judiciary
Committee that when banks acquire so much concentrated power, it is
‘difficult for us to prosecute them… if you do bring a criminal charge,
it will have a negative impact on the national economy, perhaps even the
world economy’.[^4]

Holder’s admission that the government lacked the wherewithal to punish
bankers for their widely-publicized record of extortion was a
significant milestone, particularly for a democracy that has long
struggled to contain the damage inflicted by plutocrats in its midst.
But the ability of Wall Street barons to hold the government in thrall
is nothing new.[^5] In a 1933 letter, Franklin D. Roosevelt wrote: ‘The
real truth of the matter is, as you and I know, that a financial element
in the large centers has owned the government ever since the days of
Andrew Jackson.’[^6] Owning lawmakers may be a venerable prerogative for
American financiers, but the rise of a full-blown creditocracy is more
recent. Financialization had to creep into every corner of the household
economy before the authority of the creditor class took on a sovereign,
unassailable character.

In other words, it is not enough for every social good to be turned into
a transactional commodity, as is the case in a rampant market
civilization. A creditocracy emerges when the cost of access to each of
these goods, no matter how staple, has to be debt-financed, and when
indebtedness becomes the precondition not just for material improvements
in the quality of life, but for the basic requirements of life.
Financiers seek to wrap debt around every possible asset and income
stream, placing a tollbooth on every revenue source, ensuring a flow of
interest from each. Furthermore, when fresh sources of credit are
routinely needed to service existing debt (neatly captured in the 1990s
bumper sticker, ‘I Use MasterCard to Pay Visa’),[^7] we can be sure we
are entering a more advanced phase of creditor rule.

This kind of arrangement – borrowing to cover existing debt service –
was formally institutionalized in the so-called debt trap of the 1970s
and 1980s, which put paid to the developmental aspirations of so many
global South countries. IMF loan installments were offered, not to
support social or economic development, but specifically to ensure
Northern creditors would continue to see debt service on their older
loans. When the debt trap migrated to the North, the same formula got a
good airing during the Eurozone crisis, especially in Greece, where the
‘rescue package’ offered by the troika was expressly aimed at making
German, French, and Swiss bankers whole.

But for the working poor, this kind of permanent indebtedness is a very
familiar arrangement, and has long outlived its classic expression under
feudalism, indenture, and slavery. Each of these systems of debt bondage
gave birth to successor institutions – sharecropping, company scrip,
loan sharking – and their legacy is alive and well today on the subprime
landscape of fringe finance, where ‘poverty banks’ operate in every
other storefront on Loan Alley. But the bonds generated by household
debt have also spread upwards in recent decades, and now affect the
majority of the population, tethering two generations of the
college-educated. In the U.S., 77 percent of households are in serious
debt, and one in seven Americans is being, or has been, pursued by a
debt collector.[^8]

Even those without personal loans are debtors, because public debts,
especially municipal obligations, have been structured in such a way
that the service costs to Wall Street are now routinely passed on to all
of us in the form of austerity policies. And what about the
beneficiaries? The tipping point for a creditocracy occurs when
‘economic rents’ are no longer merely a supplementary source of income
for the creditor class, but have become the most reliable and effective
instrument for the amassing of wealth and influence. In that respect, a
full-blown creditocracy may be considered distinct from earlier forms of
monopoly capitalism in which profits from production dominated.

There are many ways of illustrating this historic development. Consider
the balance of power between banks and government. In 1895, J.P. Morgan
was called upon to save the U.S. Treasury from default (and again in
1907), and yet the shoe was on the other foot by 2008, when the Treasury
was forced to bail out JPMorgan Chase, and few doubt that it would be
obliged to do so again today. The shift is also displayed in how
corporations make profits. Jumbo firms, like GE and GM, that commanded
the economy on the strength of their industrial production have become
much more dependent, for their revenue, on their firms’ respective
finance arms. Companies are no longer regarded primarily as worthy
recipients of productive loans for tangible outputs but as targets for
leveraged buy-outs, to be loaded down with debt and ruthlessly used to
extract finance fees and interest. The difference between Mitt Romney’s
career, at Bain Capital, and his father’s, at the American Motor
Company, neatly summarizes the transition from industrial to financial
capitalism.[^9] As for ordinary individuals, we are now under constant
financial surveillance by the major credit bureaus (Equifax, Experian,
and TransUnion), whose credit reports, scores, and ratings of our
conduct as debtors control the gateways to so many areas of economic
need and want. Operating outside of public oversight, these agencies
answer only to the requirements of the creditor class, and the profiles
they assign to us are like ID tags, marking our rank and class, in the
present and in the years to come, since they are used to predict future
behavior.

We know that more and more of the 99 percent are suffering from undue
debt burdens – financial claims that can never be repaid – but is it so
clear who belongs to the class of creditors? Following Margaret
Thatcher’s promotion of ‘pension fund capitalism’, the pension funds of
workers have been drawn into the financial markets. Indeed, these funds
now hold a significant portion of the public debt, especially municipal
debt, currently being used as a justification for pushing through
austerity policies. In a formal and legal sense, the workers are
creditors, and they stand to lose if the debts are written off
indiscriminately in a bankruptcy proceeding. In accord with the ‘popular
capitalist’ mentality encouraged by Thatcher and her neoliberal
successors, their investments, like all others, are exposed to risk.
Indeed, pension funds managers are forced to make speculative
investments to meet their long term promises (as much as 8 percent in
annual returns) to contributors, and so they entrust the money to Wall
Street hucksters looking to charge high fees and offload high-risk
derivatives. Corporate pension funds are routinely looted by corporate
raiders, and state pension funds have become an especially ripe target
for employers or governments looking to borrow cash, or turn them over
to hedge funds and private equity funds.

But investing savings for retirement has little bearing on workers’
primary identity as waged labor, though contradictions clearly arise
when the investments are handled by Wall Street funds that inflict
damage on workers’ interests in general. Even if the annuities do turn
out as promised, decades hence, the recipients have not been generating
their main income from investment, as is the case for the principal
beneficiaries of a creditocracy. Workers who are part of the ‘real’
economy, and whose household debts have risen while their wages
stagnated, do not really inhabit the same world as the players who live
off unearned income in the undertaxed world of financial engineering.
For sure, the diversification of pension funds, and the growth of 401(k)
retirement plans, means that many more of us who do productive work are
tied into the world of finance than was once the case. But this
circumstance has not substantially altered our sense of being in the
world, and it is far outweighed by our ensnarement, like everyone else
we know, in the bankers’ debt trap.

Banks, hedge funds, private equity firms and other entities that operate
in the shadow banking system have an interest in gathering influence and
immunity for themselves, but they are first and foremost tools of
accumulation for their owners, clients, shareholders, and direct
beneficiaries. As such, their business is to grab as much as the
economic surplus as they can by keeping everyone else in debt, for as
long as possible. The fact is that debts, especially at compound
interest, multiply at a much faster rate than the ability to repay.
Original lenders know this fact, which is why they sell on the loans as
fast they can.

## Democracy and Debt

Managing the lifelong burden of debt service is now an existential
condition for the majority, but what about its impact on citizenship?
How can a democracy survive when it is on the road to debt serfdom? The
history of the struggle for political liberty is closely tied to the
growth of credit. As James MacDonald has argued, the democratic
institutions of liberal societies were able to survive and flourish
because government bonds made it possible to borrow cheaply, especially
in times of war.[^10] But today’s bond markets, which are globally
networked and susceptible to speculative bets from hedge funds, are more
likely to ‘judge’, ‘discipline’, and ‘reward’ policymakers than to
faithfully serve their ends. Central banks increasingly act to ensure
the solvency of banks, and not sovereign governments struggling with
public deficits. The right of creditors to be made whole now routinely
overrides the responsibility of elected national representatives to
carry out the popular will, resulting in ‘failed democracies’ all over
the world. Everywhere we look, officials are being pressured to use
governments as collection agents for foreign bondholders or pass on the
costs of bankers’ speculative investments to the most vulnerable
populations. This is not just an economic arrangement, it is also a
relationship of power, with devastating impact upon popular sovereignty.
Even Mario Monti, the placid technocrat appointed in 2012 as Italian
prime minister in order to dampen popular opposition to financial power,
spoke out against what he called the emergence of ‘creditocracy’ in
Europe. He was referring specifically to how sovereign governance was
being circumvented by the priority given to foreign bondholders, as
represented through the big German, French, Swiss, and Dutch banks.

The historical record shows that a society unable to check the power of
the creditor class will quickly see the onset of debt bondage;
democracies segue into oligarchies, credit becomes a blunt instrument
for absorbing more and more economic surplus, and rents are extracted
from non-productive assets. Are we heading down this path, once again?
Or is it just loose talk? Many commentators are saying as much when they
point to the revival of debtors’ prisons, speak of student debt as a
form of indenture, and compare banking practices, on Wall Street as well
as on Loan Alley, to the most extreme forms of usury. So, too, the
revival of interest in a debt jubilee, not only in developing countries,
but here in the global North, is evocative of macro-solutions hatched in
the ancient world by rulers who were so desperate to restore the balance
of popular power in their favor that they abolished all existing debts,
freed debt slaves, and returned land to original owners.

This kind of talk is indicative of the extremity of the current debt
crisis. All the evidence shows that drastic relief measures are needed,
and that a new kind of non-extractive economy, benefitting from what
Keynes called the ‘euthanasia of the rentier’, ought to be built.
Pursuing that alternative path – to a society guided by the productive
use of credit – may be the only way of salvaging democracy. But for
establishment economists, even those who question the credo of
neoliberalism, there is no crisis, only a debt ‘overhang’ that needs to
be reduced to manageable levels before the normal pattern of
debt-financed growth can reassert itself.

There is no easy return to that debt-growth formula. After incomes
stagnated in the 1970s, respectable growth rates could only be achieved
through a series of speculative asset bubbles. Each time the bubble
burst, we could see how the formula rested on an insubstantial
foundation. As far as lasting prosperity goes, we can say that much of
the growth was fake, producing only phony wealth, and that future
efforts to inflate prices will end the same way. Also from an ecological
perspective, this pattern is entirely unsustainable. There now exists a
mountain of scientific evidence, beginning with the seminal 1974 report,
*Limits to Growth,* which testifies to the calamitous impact of
GDP-driven growth on the biosphere. Restoring business as usual, once
that pesky ‘overhang’ disappears, can only be a recipe for eco-collapse.

As with any unjust social arrangement, a creditocracy has to be stripped
of its legitimacy in the public mind before its actual hold on power is
dissolved. How far along this road have we come? Given the battering
that bankers have taken over the past five years, it’s a testament to
their self-projected mystique that they still command even a fraction of
their standing as indispensable members of society. Every other day
brings a fresh headline about their misconduct and profiteering, as
swindle after swindle is uncovered. The judicial investigations
multiply, producing few convictions (and only of junior employees) but
an ever-longer roster of fines, refunds, and other penalties. Some of
the settlements to end the criminal and civil charges are massive.
JPMorgan Chase, for example, negotiated a \$13 billion settlement the
U.S. Justice Department over packing mortgage-backed securities with
dodgy home loans. Notably, less than \$3 billion was claimed in fines
and only \$4 billion in relief for homeowners, while more than \$6
billion was allocated for investors who suffered losses.[^11] Bank of
America settled for \$17 billion under similar terms. But the profits of
these banks and their peers are so large that such penalties are
shrugged off as the cost of doing business. Public trust, the crucial
quality that banks have customarily relied on in order to trade, has
long been decimated; we have come to regard their ingenious financial
products as little more than scams, and we know that the bill for all of
their risky conduct will likely end up with us. Yet the banks retain
their cachet as essential institutions, and most importantly, their
lobbying firepower ensures that legislators will look out for their
interests.

In *The Bankers’ New Clothes*, Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig argue that
‘there is a pervasive myth that banks and banking are special and
different from all other companies in the economy. Anyone who questions
the mystique and the claims that are made is at risk of being declared
incompetent to participate in the discussion.’[^12] Finance, we are
encouraged to believe, is too complex for lay people to understand. One
of the outcomes of this mystique is that too many of us are trapped in
the payback mindset. Though we may be more and more aware of the
irresponsibility and fraud of big creditors who won’t pay their own
debts, and who offload all their risky loans to others, we still accept
that it is immoral to fail to repay our debts to them. Of course, there
are lawyers, courts, and police standing at the ready to enforce this
payback morality, and a ruined credit score to live with in the case of
a default. But these are instruments of coercion; they serve as backups
if the mechanism of consent falters. When the psychology of the debtor
shifts, as it is now slowly doing, from resignation to reluctance, or
even resistance, then the authority of the creditors’ self-interested
moralism begins to lose its sway. Then, and only then, are we able to
honestly question whether we owe anything at all to people and
institutions that, were it not for the figment of the banker’s new
clothes, would rightly be seen as engaged in extortion.


## Abolishing the Debt Sentence

More public education is needed about how creditor rule is upheld, and
it is in that spirit that we must make the case for the refusal of
household debts. When a government cannot protect its people from the
harms inflicted by rent extractors, and when debt burdens become an
existential threat to a free citizenry, then the refusal to pay is a
defensible act of civil disobedience. For those aiming to reinvent
democracy, this refusal is nothing short of a responsibility. The case
for debt cancellation in developing countries has already been made by
groups within or allied to the Debt Jubilee movement.[^13] These
advocates have devised moral and legal arguments for repudiating the
external debts of governments, and have had some success in delivering
relief for some of the world’s poorest populations. Public debts in the
Global North are now at the core of the austerity policies being
implemented from the battered periphery of the Eurozone to the
beleaguered cohort of ex-industrial cities like Detroit and Baltimore.
The process of questioning which of these debts is legitimate – and
deserving of repayment – and which are unfair impositions to be
rightfully rejected – is already underway.[^14] Now is the time to
extend this initiative to household debts, especially those taken on
simply to gain access to basic social goods.

In what follows, I summarize some of the arguments underpinning the case
for debt refusal. Most appeal to broad moral principles, as opposed to
quantifiable rules, but there is no reason why these principles could
not be applied in a way that would produce some hard numbers:

-   Loans which either benefit the creditor only, or inflict social and
    environmental damage on individuals, families, and communities,
    should be renegotiated to compensate for harms.

-   The sale of loans to borrowers who cannot repay is unprincipled, and
    so the collection of these debts should not be honored.

-   The banks, and their beneficiaries, awash in profit, have done very
    well; they have been paid enough already, and do not need to be
    additionally reimbursed.

-   Even if household debts were not intentionally imposed as political
    constraints, they unavoidably stifle our capacity to think freely,
    act conscientiously, and fulfill our democratic responsibilities.

-   Extracting usurious, long-term profits from our short-term need to
    access subsistence resources is immoral, and no less so in the case
    of vital common goods like education, healthcare, and public
    infrastructure.

-   Each act of debt service is a non-productive addition to the banks’
    balance sheets, and a subtraction from the ‘real’ economy which
    creates jobs, adequately funds social spending, and sustains the
    well-being of communities.

-   The credit was not theirs to begin with; it was obtained through the
    dubious power of money creation, thanks to fractional reserve
    banking and to the ‘magic’ of derivatives. Obliging debtors to
    forfeit future income is a form of wage theft, if the debts were
    incurred simply to prepare ourselves, in mind and body, for
    employment.

-   Given the fraud and deceit practiced by bankers, and the likelihood
    that they will not refrain from such anti-social conduct, it would
    be morally hazardous of us to reward them any further.


## References

Admati, Anat and Martin Hellwig. *The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong
with Banking and What to Do About It*, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2013, p. 2.

Chesnais*,* François. *Les dettes illégitimes: Quand les banques font
main basse sur les politiques publiques*, Paris: Liber, 2012.

Eavis, Peter and Ben Protess. ‘Considering the Fairness of JPMorgan’s
Deal’, *The New York Times*, 22 October 2013.

Hudson, Michael. ‘Democracy and Debt: Has the Link been Broken?*’
Frankfurter Algemeine Zeitung*, 5 December 2011, accessible in English
at .

MacDonald, James*. A Free Nation Deep in Debt: The Financial Roots of
Democracy*, New York: Farrar, Strauss & Giroux, 2003.

Madrick, Jeff. ‘A Bit of Good News’, *Harper’s*, April 2013.

Manning, Robert. *Credit Card Nation: The Consequences of America’s
Addiction to Credit Cards*, New York: Basic Books, 2000.

Millet, Damien and Eric Toussaint. *Who Owes Who? 50 Questions about
World Debt* London: Zed Books, 2004.

Millet, Damien and Eric Toussaint. *Debt, the IMF, and the World Bank:
Sixty Questions, Sixty Answers*, New York: Monthly Review Press, 2010.

Piketty, Thomas. *Capital in the Twenty-First Century*, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2014.

Prins, Nomi. *All the Presidents’ Bankers: The Hidden Alliances that
Drive American Power*, New York: Avalon, 2013.

Reinhardt, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff. *This Time is Different: Eight
Centuries of Financial Folly*, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2009.

Roosevelt, Elliott (ed.). ‘Letter to Col. Edward Mandell House’ (21
November, 1933), in *F.D.R.: His Personal Letters, 1928-1945*, New York:
Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1950.

Ross, Andrew. *Creditocracy and the Case for Debt Refusal*, New York: OR
Books, 2014.

[^1]: Thomas Piketty, *Capital in the Twenty-First Century,* Cambridge:
    Harvard University Press, 2014; ‘Striking it Richer: The Evolution
    of Top Incomes in the United States’, a series of data reports by
    Emmanuel Saez and Thomas Piketty, outlines how the 1 percent have
    captured income growth. The first in the series was ‘Income
    Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998’, *Quarterly Journal of
    Economics*, 118.1 (2003): 1-39. The most recent update can be found
    at
    [http://elsa.berkeley.edu/\~saez/saez-UStopincomes-2012.pdf](../customXml/item1.xml)
    showing that the top 1 percent earners captured 95 percent of the
    income gains since the recession officially ended. Also see Josh
    Bivens and Lawrence Mishel, ‘The Pay of Corporate Executives and
    Financial Professionals as Evidence of Rents in Top 1 Percent
    Incomes’, *Journal of Economic Perspectives* (Summer 2013), and
    Edward N. Wolff, ‘The Asset Price Meltdown and the Wealth of the
    Middle Class’, New York University, 2012 accessible at
    [https://appam.confex.com/appam/2012/webprogram/Paper2134.html](numbering.xml).

[^2]: Many of the arguments, and a good deal of the content, for this
    article are drawn from Andrew Ross, *Creditocracy and the Case for
    Debt Refusal*, OR Books, 2014. Available at:
    [http://www.orbooks.com/catalog/creditocracy/](styles.xml).

[^3]: ^3^ Jeff Madrick, ‘A Bit of Good News’, *Harper’s*, April 2013:
    6-7.

[^4]: See,
    [http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2013/03/11/big-banks-go-wrong-but-pay-a-little-price/](stylesWithEffects.xml)

[^5]: ^4^ See Nomi Prins, *All the Presidents’ Bankers: The Hidden
    Alliances that Drive American Power,* New York: Avalon, 2013.

[^6]: ^5^ Letter to Col. Edward Mandell House (21 November 1933), in
    Elliott Roosevelt (ed.) *F.D.R.: His Personal Letters, 1928-1945*,
    New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1950, p. 373.

[^7]: ^6^ As quoted in Robert Manning, *Credit Card Nation: The
    Consequences of America’s Addiction to Credit Cards,* New York:
    Basic Books, 2000, p. 27.

[^8]: ^6^ According to an August 2013 report from the Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York, almost 15 percent of all credit reports – covering
    an estimated 30 million consumers – displayed collection items from
    debt collection. In other words, one in seven Americans was being,
    or had been, hounded by debt collectors. *Quarterly Report on
    Household Debt and Credit* (August 2013) accessible at
    [http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/national\_economy/householdcredit/DistrictReport\_Q22013.pdf](settings.xml).

[^9]: ^7^ Matt Taibbi, ‘Greed and Debt: The True Story of Mitt Romney
    and Bain Capital’, *Rolling Stone*, 29 August 2012.

[^10]: ^8^ James MacDonald, *A Free Nation Deep in Debt: The Financial
    Roots of Democracy*, New York: Farrar, Strauss & Giroux, 2003.

[^11]: ^9^ Peter Eavis and Ben Protess, ‘Considering the Fairness of
    JPMorgan’s Deal’, *The New York Times,* 22 October 2013.

[^12]: ^10^ Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, *The Bankers’ New Clothes:
    What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do About It,* Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, 2013, p. 2.

[^13]: ^11^ Damien Millet and Eric Toussaint, *Who Owes Who? 50
    Questions about World Debt,* London: Zed Books, 2004; *Debt, the
    IMF, and the World Bank: Sixty Questions, Sixty Answers* New York:
    Monthly Review Press, 2010.

[^14]: ^12^ François Chesnais*, Les Dettes Illégitimes: Quand les
    Banques Font Main Basse sur les Politiques Publiques,* Paris: Liber,
    2012.
