---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Measuring Value in the Commons-Based Ecosystem: Bridging the Gap Between the Commons and the Market 

# 

# Primavera De Filippi and Samer Hassan 

## Prelude

Maya is a joyful girl that is well known for her community activities in
her small town. She has two clear passions: writing Wikipedia articles
and making Creative commons documentaries… but she struggles to survive,
being forced to make stressful and unfulfilling advertising work in
order to make some money.

Maya is one among many who contribute daily to projects like Wikipedia,
Creative Commons, Free/Open Source software, and others. But how much
value does each of these projects have? How much do people value these
contributions? How could contributors be rewarded for their hard work
while still keeping the voluntary and cooperative dynamics inherent to
these projects? Ideally, we would like to figure out:

-   A way for these kinds of projects to assess their own social value.

-   A way for people to understand the value they are contributing to
    these projects.

-   A way for people to benefit from the goods and services provided by
    the market, without necessarily having to play by market logics.

Maya would love to have a way for her and others to see how much she is
contributing to the social good. Maya’s family doesn’t understand why
she spends so much time working on things that provide no money in
return, whereas Maya is frustrated about why her contributions to the
commons are not recognized as actual work by society. Even more, Maya
would love for her contributions to society to be recognized (and
potentially rewarded) by the market, so that she could benefit from
goods and services without having to spend so much time on her
advertising job.

How could we help Maya?

We present here a system – which we will name Sabir – that can resolve
some of the most recurrent problems encountered within Commons-based
Peer Production (CBPP) communities. The Sabir system[^1] is composed of
three layers that will help us:

1.  Understanding the social value – as opposed to market value – of
    different CBPP communities, so as to compare them to one another.

2.  Identifying the value generated by individuals contributing to the
    commons and evaluating it through a common denominator of value.

3.  Creating an interface between the market and the CBPP ecosystem so
    that the two can interact, and benefit from each other.

## Introduction

Today, the production and dissemination of information is increasingly
done outside of the market economy. An alternative model of production
is emerging – both on the internet and elsewhere – that does not rely on
market transactions but rather on sharing and cooperation among peers.
Production is based on voluntary collaboration and resources are
released under specific licenses, such as Open Source and Creative
Commons licenses, so that they can be freely used and reused by
everyone. This new model of production – sometimes referred to as
CBPP[^2] – constitutes the sharing economy, which consists, for the most
part, of social interactions that do not belong to the market economy.
In the realm of information, Wikipedia is perhaps the most popular
example, along with Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) and Creative
Commons, but the same applies also in the physical realm, with a growing
number of initiatives such as the Open Source Ecology, FabLabs, etc.

Commons-based Peer Production (CBPP) is an emerging and innovative model
of production, both online and offline, characterized by peer-to-peer
collaboration and contribution oriented towards the production of a
collectively-owned resource. CBPP lends itself to a different economic
system based on the notions of *abundance* and *sharing*, which does not
properly fit within the framework of most conventional economic theories
based on the notion of *scarcity* and *exchange*.[^3]

To the extent that CBPP operates outside of the market economy,
conventional market mechanisms, such as pricing, are unable to estimate
the overall social value of CBPP – which is for the most part based on
non-market transactions.[^4] In the market economy, the key concern is
to assess the economic value (or market value) of things through the
mechanism of supply and demand. Everything else – such as friendship,
solidarity, or even deeper ideological values such as freedom or justice
– are regarded as mere externalities which will only be accounted for to
the extent that they can be, or have been translated into monetary
value.[^5]

Without the traditional system of ‘pricing’, one can no longer rely on a
universal unit of analysis (value proxy) that can be used to assess and
compare the value of different CBPP platforms, as well as the value
contributed by various individuals to these platforms.[^6] Even when
they do have monetary value, given that commons-based entities operate
outside, or at the edges of the market economy, we cannot rely on
traditional market mechanisms (such as pricing) to assess the value
produced by them. Hence, we need to identify another indicator of
‘social value’ (other than price) capable of understanding and measuring
the value generated by CBPP and that will allow us to assess, compare
and communicate the value of different entities or projects that
operate, only and exclusively, in the sharing economy.

Maya would like to show her friends and family, who are not part of the
commons ecosystem, what is the value she is contributing to the world.
Everyone knows about Wikipedia, but still not many people know about
Creative Commons, or even smaller initiatives like Couchsurfing and the
like. Moreover, even if they are (either directly or indirectly)
benefiting from them, it is difficult for people to understand the value
that these commons-based initiatives yield.

## Value Metric for Commons-Based Entities

For instance, what’s the value of Wikipedia? Does it have a monetary
value? – and if so, would it make sense to measure it in monetary terms?
We know it has a high social value because of the perceived value others
give to it – but how can this value be measured? Ideally, we should have
a quantified indicator of the approximate (social) value of Wikipedia or
any commons-based entities/communities (from now on CBEs[^7]).

Maya could then communicate to her family and friends more easily, by
simply pointing to the value of the different CBEs she’s contributing to
the importance of her (unpaid) contribution to the commons.

Of course, in order to have an indicator, we need an alternative *value
metric*, separate from the market one, that will allow us to understand
the value of CBEs. We believe such a metric of social value of a CBE
should be constructed on 2 basic assumptions:

-   as an indicator of social value, its value should emerge from the
    network of involved actors, that is, the CBEs;

-   as a subjective value, it should be based on the perception of
    peers, that is, the other CBEs.

Thus, based on those premises, we propose a value metric algorithm
inspired by:

-   Flattr[^8], understood as a meter of individual appreciation that
    translates into donations. That is, the peers may express their
    appreciation for other peers by clicking on their badge (*flattring*
    them), and anyone can see the amount of flattrs received by someone
    (or something e.g.: a blog post, a project, etc).

-   Google’s *PageRank*[^9], as a means to ponder the importance of a
    webpage based on its incoming links. That is, the algorithm
    calculates a quantification of the social relevance of each node
    based on the network of links.

In our model, we combine the two in order to achieve a more
sophisticated system for estimating the social value of CBEs:

1.  Inspired by Flattr, any CBE can *vouch* for another CBE that it
    considers valuable.

2.  Inspired by PageRank algorithm, we can then calculate how many
    incoming vouches, as opposed to incoming links, a CBE has according
    to a specific algorithm.

3.  Inspired by the fractionality of Flattr, a CBE may assign a
    particular weight to each one of its vouches (where the sum of these
    weights given must be always equal to 1).

4.  Inspired by the transitivity of PageRank, a CBE channels a fraction
    (a percentage indicated by the vouch weight) of its own social value
    to the CBEs it is vouching.

5.  The more value a CBE accumulates, the more socially valuable it will
    be considered. That is, quantity matters: how many vouches I have;
    and quality matters: who is vouching for me.

We can see an example of this indicator (which we will refer to as ‘the
social value indicator’ from now on) in Fig. 1, where Wikipedia has
plenty of value (1,500, and a larger circle) because of receiving plenty
of weight. Couchsurfing is small, but still it has 200 because even if
it’s only receiving a 0.1 of weight, it comes from the large Wikipedia.

[Fig. 1: Example of several CBEs vouching each other with different
weights, resulting in a social value number for each*.*]

As an algorithm, in its simplest form,[^10] we can implement it as
follows:

For any given entity X, its social value (SV) at time t is expressed by
the function SV(X, t). SV(W,t) indicates the total amount of *weight*
(w) received by X from other entities in the system (A, B, C),
ponderated by the SV of these entities:

*(Eq. 1)*![](media/media/image1.png)

Taking into account that every CBE can assign weight to others, with a
sum must equal to 1.

More generally, the complete formula can be expressed as:

![](media/media/image2.png)

*(Eq. 2)*

> *where *
>
> *Ux = the universe of all the entities assigning a weight to X*
>
> *Vx = the universe of all the entities that were assigned weight by X*

This specification complies with the definition of *ordered weighted
averaging* (OWA)[^11] aggregation operator in fuzzy logic, and therefore
it has its interesting mathematical properties.

Finally, it is also important to note that the community of communities
forming within the system is structurally (and necessarily) biased: it
should only be made of commons-based entities (CBEs) forming a
web-of-trust. This requires some kind of pre- and post-filtering or
discrimination. For instance, how to prevent Skype from joining, if it
claims to be part the commons ecosystem?

-   To begin with, in order to join, a new CBE may need to be endorsed
    by certain number of CBEs (algorithm pre-filtering): e.g., one needs
    to be invited by at least 5 entities before it may join the system.

<!-- -->

-   Subsequently, the CBEs participating within the system would
    self-regulate who belongs to the system (community filtering): e.g.,
    if a large amount of CBEs believe Skype is not a CBE, it may be
    kicked out.

-   In addition, the system may contain rules that would facilitate the
    rejection process (algorithm post-filtering): e.g. if no one vouches
    for an entity for a long period, it is a signal it may be kicked
    out.

Essentially, this would be creating a network-of-trust model, and thus
the initial selection of entities might have a significant impact on the
subsequent population of the ecosystem.

## Rewards for Contributors to the Commons

Thanks to the social value indicator, we now have a clear idea of how
much social value each CBE has within the commons-based ecosystem.
However, a CBE can do nothing with such an indicator, except bragging
it. We propose here a possible use for such an indicator, which would
allow for the value contributed to the CBE to flow back to where it
originated: the CBE contributors.

The (macro) value of CBEs is generated only and exclusively by the
community of individuals participating in (micro) co-creating content
(articles, source code, videos, etc.), discussing, sharing, rating, and
essentially contributing to the community. Therefore, the long-term
sustainability of CBEs depends on a constant flow of (quality)
contributions, which can only be achieved if the contributors are
spending a sufficient amount of time, effort, and resources contributing
to the CBE over time. Thus, it would be ideal if contributors to the
commons could somehow be rewarded for their time and effort.

Today, CBEs (and online platforms in general) can employ different
mechanisms to gratify their contributors, by means of both immaterial
rewards (e.g. reputation, admin rights, privileges) and material rewards
(e.g. virtual currencies, donations) as seen in Table 1.

[Table 1: A series of examples of existing value metrics and value
rewards.]

Yet, most of these reward mechanisms are limited by one of two issues.
On one hand, rewarding contributors with material rewards – such as
money, or anything that can be readily exchanged for money – may lead to
undesirable results:

-   if some contributors are paid for, others may not want to contribute
    *for free* anymore.

-   as more and more people start contributing *for money,* efforts may
    shift towards these things that will be the most highly rewarded, as
    opposed to those that people feel the most passionate about.

-   since money is scarce, contributors may start competing against each
    other, instead of collaborating towards a common goal.

On the other hand, if gratification is limited to immaterial rewards,
the situation of contributors is barely improved. That is, contributors
need to keep doing *those boring tasks that provide them with a source
of income* instead of contributing to their favorite CBE: the one which
does not know how to reward them appropriately. Besides, given that most
of these rewards are CBE-dependant, contributions do not scale well in
multiple CBEs: each reward mechanism is disconnected from the other and
contributors cannot aggregate, exchange or compare the value they helped
generate in different communities.

We propose here a mechanism for rewarding contributors, which abides to
the following principles:

-   It should not involve money, nor any scarce and transferable
    resource that may be exchanged for money –

> thus avoiding the emergence of competitive or individualistic dynamics
> among contributors.

-   It should support people *in the physical world,* nowadays dominated
    by market logics.

-   It should account for the contributions from all CBEs the
    contributor may be participating in.

Summing up, what we aim for is an interface between the market and the
commons-based ecosystem that would provide rewards that are
non-transferable (i.e. not currency-based) but that the market may
somehow recognize.

Let’s imagine that we have such system – the so-called *Sabir* system –
for a moment, and follow the story...

<span id="h.145nwr8oa4em" class="anchor"></span>

## The Journey Towards Rewarding Maya

Imagine a world with a flourishing commons-based ecosystem that operates
alongside the market economy. In that world, some CBEs would be invited
to join a network-based value system, where their value would be
established by other CBEs according to their weight in the ecosystem
(see the social value indicator in the previous section).

Now, let’s assume for a moment that, in such an imaginary world,
Wikipedia (WP) has a social value of 1500, and Creative Commons (CC) has
a social value of 1000. Maya is a CC video artist and WP contributor;
she only has a part time job, because she wants to spend more time on
doing what she loves, that is, making CC documentaries and WP articles.

Whoever contributes to the commons is rewarded with a particular set of
non-transferrable tokens issued by a specific CBE. Each CBE is free to
decide on the number of tokens to produce, and on the manner in which
these tokens will be redistributed to its contributors, according to an
internal reward mechanism based on gratitude and appreciation. Each CBE
has its own token type, that is, its tokens are different from those
other CBEs may issue.

WP has lots of contributors, so it has issued 12,500 tokens. CC has only
issued 5,000 tokens so far. As Maya participates actively in both of
these communities, she has received 125 WP-tokens and 200 CC-Tokens,
which she collects in her portfolio.

In order for people to compare the value of their contributions between
different CBEs, the value of each token must be translated into a common
denominator of value, Sabir, calculated with the following formula:

![](media/media/image3.png)

*(Eq. 3)*

and thus, the number of sabirs for one person *P* would be expressed by
the following:

![](media/media/image4.png)

*(Eq. 4)*

Thus, in the case of CC:

![](media/media/image5.png)

*(Eq. 5)*

Hence, Maya’s 200 CC-Tokens are equal to 40 sabirs, and Maya’s overall
contribution to the commons is equal to:

Total number of sabirs (Maya) = 125 \* $\frac{SV(WP)}{12,500}$ + 200 \*
$\frac{SV(CC)}{5,000}$ = 15 + 40 = 55 sabirs

Maya is really proud of herself, not only can she understand the value
that she has contributed to the commons over the past year, but she can
also easily express it to her friends.

### Gratification

[Fig. 2: One CBE (Wikipedia), with its own social value, generates and
distributes its own tokens (WP-tokens) to different contributors based
on their task.]

The system of gratification can be explained through the example shown
in Fig. 2. Wikipedia, with a Social Value of 1500 as we saw in Fig. 1,
issues 12,500 Wikipedia-tokens (WP-tokens). In this specific moment,
Wikipedia is adopting a strategy of prioritizing the quality rather than
the quantity of its articles, so it decides to reward article reviews
the most, followed by donations and then the creation of new articles.
In the particular example we illustrated, Wikipedia rewards with 20
WP-tokens all those providing an in-depth review of existing articles,
15 WP-tokens for each donation over \$200, and 10 WP-tokens for each
article created longer than a stub that is accepted by the community.
This way, it is providing some kind of reward to its contributors. Even
though this might distort the nature of contributions, if properly used,
this can be employed as a tool for the CBE to slightly direct the flow
of contributions towards the tasks that are most needed at the moment.
For instance, if a contributor hesitates on whether to create a new
article, or review an existing one, she might favor the review based on
the higher value it has for the community, as expressed by the internal
mechanism of rewards.

The system should make sure that users know what kind of rewards can be
earned by which tasks. Thus, each CBE should provide a standard table
where these task plus gratification are indicated. The more transparent
it is, the more the CBE could encourage its contributors to focus on the
most needed tasks. The system should also make sure that each CBE keeps
track of how many tokens are earned by each contributor. Thus, it should
provide a standard way of accessing such information, either by querying
the CBE contributor’s profile (if any), or via an API for people to use
their own personal *wallet* – i.e. a software that can keep a record of
all the tokens they have earned and what is the sabirs value of each one
of these tokens.

Even though the tokens are a quantified expression of gratitude, we are
not aiming to *quantify everything*. These rewards can be earned
according to *internal rules* decided by each CBE, and such rules can be
either quantitative or qualitative, and can refer to, for instance:

-   Project / Task for which people can earn a particular number of
    tokens. Reward may be based on both quantity (e.g. number of words)
    and quality (e.g. 3 OK’s from librarians).

-   Role / Function providing some sort of salary-like remuneration.
    This may be common for maintenance and caring-related roles, e.g.
    Wikipedia administrators might earn 5 WP-token / month.

-   Other, unpredictable rewards. Tokens can be distributed as prizes to
    really productive or skilled users that did remarkable
    contributions. We can also think of some users/administrators with
    the right to distribute a certain amount of tokens as they wish.

WP-tokens are generated on demand: Wikipedia can issue as many as they
want, that is, no *a priori* artificial limitation is imposed. This
means that these tokens are not scarce, as it happens with real money or
typically to virtual currencies (such as Bitcoin). Besides, these
WP-tokens are non-transferable: a contributor cannot *sell* its tokens
to someone else, neither exchange them for anything. Finally, the value
of each WP-token is different than the value of each CC-token: the value
depends on the actual social value of the CBE issuing them, and on the
amount issued.

We propose here a simple way to normalize the value of all those CBE
tokens, through our common denominator of value, *Sabir*: a quantified
indicator that approximates the value of all contributions that someone
has made to the commons. Such an indicator is easy to understand not
just by the contributor herself but also by others, who might not be
acquainted with the particular CBEs to which the contribution was made.

## Interaction With Market Players

Sabir can essentially be regarded as a proxy for value in the
commons-based ecosystem. Just like the price does in the market economy,
Sabir allows for individual contributions to be assessed and compared
according to a common denominator of value (which remains distinct from
market-value). While price is linked to a particular service or product
of exchange, Sabir is an expression of the value that a particular
individual contributed to the commons over a lifetime, and should
therefore remain linked to that individual over the whole lifetime (i.e.
it is not transferrable).

As a common denominator of value, Sabir establishes a common language
(lingua franca), an interface acting as a bridge between the commons and
the market economy, so that the two can benefit from each other, without
one actually taking over the other. Indeed, by introducing a
quantitative denominator of value for commons-based contributions
(similar to price in the market economy), Sabir makes it easier for
market entities to understand the value generated by CBE contributors to
the common good, and reward them accordingly, if they so wish. Hence,
people who contributed highly to the commons but who remained outside of
the market economy might eventually be able to interact with the market
economy, insofar as some commercial player recognizes the value of their
contribution to the commons. These market players can – if they so wish
– provide free/discounted goods or services to anyone who contributed to
the commons, as a form of appreciation to their work.[^12]

Maya’s part-time job doesn’t provide her with plenty of income.
Fortunately, there are several market entities, popular among CBE
contributors, which recognize the value of her work. Once a week, Maya
can have free lunch in a local restaurant whose owner is also a CC
artist, and she can benefit from a free license for Adobe Photoshop.

From a commercial perspective, Sabir enables market players to
price-discriminate between standard customers and CBE contributors,
potentially restricting their offers only to those people who
contributed at least x Sabir to the commons.

Maya loves to record her songs with commercial recording software, but
the license is expensive; fortunately the software company provides free
licenses to anyone who contributed over 10 sabirs to the Free/Libre Open
Source Software community.

Besides Sabir being an open value system, anyone could assign value to
CBEs according to their own value metrics, e.g. schools or universities
could apply the ‘education’ matrix, giving more importance to Wikipedia
and Creative Commons, whereas a local restaurant might apply the ‘slow
food’ matrix, giving more weight to local farmers and producers. Thus,
the previous Equation \#4 could be customized by a third-party M as
follows:

![](media/media/image6.png)

*(Eq. 6)*

That is, the third party may apply its customized *value matrix* to the
already given social value of the CBEs. Still, not every third-party
needs to build a matrix: they may use the standard social value (Eq. 4),
use their own customized matrix, or use a matrix deployed by others.
E.g. Github may use the standard social value, a customized
Value\_Matrix\_Github, or the Value\_Matrix\_FOSS, a common matrix used
by many within the Free/Open Source Software realm.

Maya is a good student; she’s smart and very interested in the topics
she loves. She spends a lot of time on Wikipedia, researching and
reporting her findings together with a community of other passionate
users. The school recognizes the value she’s contributing to the
‘Commons’ and gives her better grades for that, although the university
only looks at the commons from an ‘education lens’ which assigns greater
value to academic institutions such as Wikipedia or the P2PUniversity,
and does not care too much about other CBEs such as Couchsurfing or
other non-academic CBE platforms.

Individuals can choose whether to work for the market (earning money) or
for the commons (earning sabirs), without necessarily having to give up
for the other. By providing an interface between the commons and the
market economy, Sabir might ultimately encourage people to contribute to
the commons in order to benefit from the advantageous deals provided by
certain market entities to CBE contributors.

Eventually, as more and more market entities recognize the value of
Sabir, and CBE contributors accordingly, Maya will be able to spend more
time doing what she loves, contributing to the commons while benefiting
from the goods/services offered by the market without necessarily having
to interact (directly) with the market economy.

Over time, a positive feedback loop is established, as the market
entities that support (or sponsor) the commons will gain reputation
within the commons-based ecosystem. Ultimately, this would lead more and
more people to purchase their goods or services.

Every time she discovers a new entity that supports the commons, Maya
gives them a good rank, and tells all her friends about them. Whether or
not they are themselves CBEs contributors, they will nonetheless be
happy to purchase the services offered by that entity, knowing they are
ultimately also helping the commons.

[Fig. 3: Example illustrating the current state of affairs for
contributors to the Commons and how Sabir may help changing it.]

## In Fig. 3, we illustrate the benefits of the Sabir system, as an interface between the market and the commons-based ecosystem. Nowadays, Maya is contributing to various CBEs but, since she’s not earning any money from this effort, she cannot benefit from the products provided by the market system (burgers and ice cream from McDonald’s in this case) unless she actually decides to play the market game by getting a remunerated job. Tomorrow, thanks to Sabir, Maya will be able to express the value that she has been contributing to the commons through a common denominator (the amount of sabir she has accumulated in her wallet), which can be easily understood by market actors. In this example, WcDonald’s recognizes the value of the commons and has implemented a specific policy to reward CBE contributors with free burgers and free or discounted ice creams, depending on the amount of value contributed to the commons. Hence, Alice is happy since she can keep contributing to the commons, knowing that the time she spends doing so will counts towards obtaining free burgers and ice cream from WcDonald’s. Bob also contributed to the commons, but to a lesser extent, and he’s therefore only entitled to a discount on the ice cream.

## <span id="h.i10un8l4olf3" class="anchor"><span id="h.6u95xguo11u5" class="anchor"></span></span>

## Implications & Benefits

In a nutshell, the proposed system can help (1) measure CBEs social
value, (2) distribute non-transferable tokens to relevant contributors,
and (3) facilitate the process of rewarding these contributors by market
entities. The system presents a variety of benefits for the various
actors involved, as follows.

### For Commons-Based Entities

<span id="h.lqipr6k8b5lk" class="anchor"></span>*Understand CBEs’
Perceived Systemic Value *

From the perspective of CBEs, the clearest benefit of Sabir is that it
allows for each CBE *to understand its own value within the CBPP
ecosystem* thanks to the social value metric – or at least, an
approximation of how it is perceived by others, and its evolution over
time. For instance, a decrease in the social value of a CBE may be
regarded as a signal for a variety of things, e.g. poor relationships,
bad communication, or perhaps just a lack of focus on what really
matters. Without the social value metric, CBEs would remain ignorant of
how they are perceived by other CBEs.

<span id="h.nt8u7awarlz8" class="anchor"></span>*Encouraging
Participation and Growth by Means of a Reward System for Contributors *

Another benefit of Sabir is that it *facilitates the elaboration of a
system of internal rewards for estimating the value of contributions*.
This is a typical issue for many CBEs, they are interested in reward
systems in order to promote participation, but still there are problems:
reputation systems can be risky, as they may trigger unexpected changes
within communities; and current reward mechanisms have many issues, as
seen above. With Sabir, the introduction of non-transferable
CBE-dependant tokens can be done in a gradual and systematic manner.
This would minimize the risks and, if the experimentation fails, it is
easy to revert back to the initial state of affairs.

<span id="h.bs7vwskbmhzs" class="anchor"></span>*Attract Contributors
and Direct Their Contributions Where they are the most Needed*

A third benefit of such a gratification system is that it would likely
*increase the participation and growth of the community of
contributors*, while also providing a means to *direct the
contributions* *to where they are most needed.* CBEs might not only be
concerned in increasing participation, but also in promoting a certain
type of contribution (donations, maintenance, technical tasks,
filtering, etc) that it is urgently needed but lacking.

### For Commons-Based Contributors

<span id="h.tmny4os0xugt" class="anchor"></span>*Understand the Value
Contributed to the CBEs and to the Whole Ecosystem*

Similarly to CBEs, a direct benefit for contributors is the ability to
understand the value they are providing both to the whole commons-based
ecosystem (expressed in sabirs) and to each individual CBE (expressed in
their own gratification-tokens). This is particularly useful to the
extent that individual contributors can compare the value they
contribute to different CBEs and understand where their contributions
are the most needed, and even switch to another community where their
contribution is more appreciated. While it might seem like a loss to the
community, it is better that the contributor acknowledges the fact that
her contributions are not being appreciated, so as to reduce the
possible frustration which might lead to the contributor leaving the
community anyway.

<span id="h.gphyzer4t19h" class="anchor"></span>*Communicate the Value
of One’s Contribution to the Commons*

By providing a common denominator of value, which applies equally to all
CBEs, Sabir makes it easier for ‘commoners’ to communicate the value
they have contributed to society, and maybe even encourage others to
join and contribute to the commons as well (so as to get their own
sabirs!).

<span id="h.hcg0mh6ecoym" class="anchor"></span>*Receive Direct Benefits
From the Market Entities Recognizing Sabir*

The main benefits for contributors is obviously those coming from market
players that recognize Sabir as a reliable indicator of the value that
has been contributed by each individual to the commons-based ecosystem.
With a growing community of commoners and market entities joining the
system, Sabir may engender profound changes on commoners’ lives, who
might end up reducing their dependence on traditional market mechanisms
(ruled by money) to spend more time contributing to the commons, while
nonetheless being able to benefit from some of the goods and services
provided by the market.

### For Market Players[^13]

<span id="h.kwoifbhaze28" class="anchor"></span>*Direct Economic
Benefits Through Price Discrimination*

Market players can engage into fine-grained price discrimination, by
means of customized pricing policies which allow them to allocate some
of their resources – otherwise wasted – to the commons, without
(excessively) affecting the market price. For instance, a software
company could offer particular benefits to open source contributors by
means of specific licenses (akin to the ‘educational’ licensing schemes
for students or universities). The advantage of such particular kind of
price discrimination is that it does not (theoretically) affect the
market price, because only commons-based contributors will be able to
benefit from it.[^14]

<span id="h.nkwpastlttb9" class="anchor"></span>*Indirect Economic
Benefits as a Result of Greater Visibility and Reputation*

Although they do not receive immediate economic returns, it is common
practice for many market players to support commons-based initiatives,
such as social, cultural, or educational programs, in order to gain
greater visibility and reputation. With Sabir, market players can
support the commons-based ecosystem without having to distinguish
between different initiatives in order to select the ones that they
would rather donate their resources to. They can, instead, indirectly
contribute to the commons-based ecosystem as a whole, simply by showing
appreciation to anyone who contributes to the commons and rewarding them
accordingly – although they maintain the right to assign more value to
certain initiatives than others. Market players participating in the
system might benefit not only from greater visibility or reputation, but
also from collateral economic returns, as people who share the same
values will be more likely to purchase from them (similar to
environment-friendly companies). Besides, those who benefit from
discounted/free goods or services will also be more likely to purchase
other goods or services provided by these same players.

<span id="h.o0484tlf0jsu" class="anchor"></span>*Self-Realization*

Although, in most economic theories, market players are described as
rational beings acting according to their own self-interest, in
practice, behind market players there are also human beings with
principles and ideological values that might go counter traditional
economic rationality. Hence, certain market players might be tempted to
participate into the system in order to feel better about themselves, by
supporting the projects that reflect their own values and, more
generally, by contributing to making the world a better place.

### Systemic

<span id="h.31cn5gcuumvi" class="anchor"></span>*Interface Between the
Market and the Commons-Based Ecosystem*

From a systemic approach, the main advantage of Sabir is that it acts as
a bridge between the commons-based ecosystem and the market economy,
without necessarily favoring one over the other. Today, the market can
take from the commons, i.e. it can benefit from the outcome of CBPP,
without ever giving back to the commons-based ecosystem. Thus, it is to
some extent free riding over the commons (which are thus subsidizing the
market economy). Conversely, the commons-based ecosystem cannot benefit
from any of the goods or services that the market provides, unless it
actually adopts a market logic, which necessarily entails the
commodification of commons-based resources to be turned into an object
of trade.

<span id="h.xamm8hz9rh8d" class="anchor"></span>*Cooperation Without
Contamination*

Thanks to Sabir, the two systems can keep operating according to their
own logics: *abundance,* *collaboration, and sharing* for CBPP,
*scarcity,* *competition* and *exchange* for the market. Nonetheless
they are able to interact with one another without incurring the risk of
contaminating, or being contaminated by the other. Individuals can
choose whether to work for the market (earning money) or for the commons
(earning sabirs), without having to give up one for the other. As Sabir
gets more widely adopted, people will be able to spend more time doing
what they love, contributing to the commons while also benefiting from
the market economy.

<span id="h.z2b4edprq55d" class="anchor"></span>*Positive Feedback Loop
Between the Commons and the Market System*

As a result, Sabir might encourage people to contribute to the commons
in order to benefit from the deals provided to CBE contributors by
certain market entities. Over time, a positive feedback loop will
therefore be established, as market entities that support (or sponsor)
the commons will gain reputation within the commons-ecosystem. This
might, ultimately, bring more and more people to purchase their goods or
services on the market, knowing that, by doing so, they are also helping
the commons.

## Concluding Remarks

The value of CBPP has been widely acknowledged over the past few
years.[^15] Accounting for the value produced by different CBEs and
determining the relative value of each contribution is a worthy
endeavor, which is however difficult to achieve insofar as there are –
to date – no proper tools capable of understanding the value of CBEs or
estimating the value generated by their community members.

The Sabir system combines some (but not all) characteristics of a credit
score, a cryptocurrency, and a reputation system in order to provide an
indicator which constitutes a proxy for *social value* (as opposed to
*market value*) in the commons-based ecosystem.

As individuals contribute to the commons, they receive ‘gratitude’ from
the CBE they have contributed to (expressed in their own
gratification-system, i.e. the CBE tokens). As a common denominator of
value, Sabir represents the *lingua franca* between these different
systems. It translates the gratitude generated by individual
contributions into a numeric value according to an algorithm (standard
or customized through a value matrix) ponderating every contribution
with the overall social value of the commons to which they contributed
(see Equation 3). As such, Sabir makes it easy for anyone to assess the
value produced within a particular CBE, as well as to compare the values
of different CBEs among each other.

Through Sabir, it therefore becomes possible to benefit from the
advantages provided by a universal indicator of value, without falling
within the scope of conventional economic theories. Indeed, just like
the price does in the market economy, Sabir allows for individual
contributions to be compared according to a common denominator of value.
Yet, the value expressed by Sabir is not the actual *market value* (or
exchange-value) but rather the *value* *that emerges from every
contribution to the commons*. In other words, Sabir acts as a proxy for
the value of an individual actions within the commons-based ecosystem.
Hence, as opposed to price – which is linked to the product or service
of exchange – Sabir is ultimately linked to the individuals contributing
to the commons. It is, therefore, important not to confuse Sabir with an
actual currency (or cryptocurrency). As opposed to conventional
currencies, which can be transferred from one individual to another, the
Sabir indicator should stick to the same individual during a whole
lifetime, i.e. it cannot be transferrable although, just like price, its
value may fluctuate over time.

And yet, measuring the value of CBPP within a non-market economy
nonetheless raises an important question. It is unclear, at the moment,
whether the introduction of a system like Sabir, offering a formalized,
personal (albeit non-transferable) indicator of value is likely to
increase or reinforce the motivations for people to contribute to the
CBPP ecosystem, or whether it might, on the contrary, disrupt that
particular set of motivations which have been established thus far.[^16]
Hence, could CBPP values (such as freedom, sharing, or cooperation)
actually be translated into quantifiable terms, without incurring a
loss?

## Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the people of the P2Pvalue project for
their feedback. This work was partially supported by the Framework
program FP7-ICT-2013-10 of the European Commission through project
P2Pvalue (grant no.: 610961).

## References

Bauwens, Michel. ‘The Political Economy of Peer Production*’*,
*CTheory*, Vol. 1 (2005).

Benkler, Yochai, *The Wealth of Networks. How Social production
Transforms Markets and Freedom*, New Haven: Tale University Press, 2006.

Benkler, Yochai. ‘Peer Production and Cooperation’, forthcoming in J.M.
Bauer and M. Latzer (eds) *Handbook on the Economics of the Internet*,
Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 2015.

Buterin, Vitalik. *A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized
Application Platform*, White Paper, 2014,
<https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper>.

Cheal, David. *The Gift Economy*. New York: Routledge, 1988.

Cohen, I. Glen. ‘The Price of Everything, the Value of Nothing:
Reframing the Commodification Debate’, *Harvard Law Review*, 117.689
(2003).

De Filippi, Primavera. ‘Translating Commons-Based Peer Production Values
into Metrics: Towards Commons-Based Crypto-Currencies’, forthcoming in
Lee Kuo Chen D. (ed.) *The Handbook of Cryptocurrency*. Elsevier.

Gold, Lorna. *The Sharing Economy: Solidarity Networks Transforming
Globalisation*. Burlington: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd, 2014.

Hess, Charlotte and Ostrom, Elinor. ‘A Framework for Analyzing the
Knowledge Commons’, in *Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From
Theory to Practice*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.

Lindenberg, Siegwart. ‘Contractual Relations and Weak Solidarity: The
Behavioral Basis of Restraints on Gain-Maximization’, *Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics* (JITE)/Zeitschrift für die
Gesamte Staatswissenschaft (1988): 39-5.

Schiller, Robert. *Finance and the Good Society*, New Haven; Princeton
University Press, 2012.

Page, Lawrence, et al. *The PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to
the Web*, 1999.

Yager, Ronald R. and Kacprzyk, Janusz, *The Ordered Weighted Averaging
Operators: Theory and Applications*, Kluwer: Norwell, MA, 1997.

[^1]: Sabir website: [http://sabir.cc](numbering.xml) - For additional
    details on the implementation, see the FAQ on the website.

[^2]: Yochai Benkler, *The Wealth of Networks*: *How Social Production
    Transforms Markets and Freedom*, New Haven: Tale University Press,
    2006.

[^3]: Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom, ‘A Framework for Analyzing the
    Knowledge Commons’, in Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom (eds)
    *Understanding Knowledge as a Commons: From Theory to Practice*,
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.

[^4]: Robert Schiller, *Finance and the Good Society*, New Haven:
    Princeton University Press, 2012.

[^5]: Siegwart Lindenberg, ‘Contractual Relations and Weak Solidarity:
    The Behavioral Basis of Restraints on Gain-Maximization’, *Journal
    of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE)/Zeitschrift für
    die gesamte Staatswissenschaft*, 39.5 (1988); Glen I. Cohen, ‘The
    Price of Everything, The Value of Nothing: Reframing the
    Commodification Debate’, *Harvard Law Review*, 117.689 (2003).

[^6]: Primavera De Filippi, ‘Translating Commons-based Peer Production
    Values Into Metrics: Towards Commons-based Crypto-Currencies’, in
    Lee Kuo Chen D. (ed.) *The Handbook of Cryptocurrency*, Amsterdam:
    Elsevier, forthcoming 2015.

[^7]: Which are usually named Commons-Based Peer Production (CBPP)
    communities. Here we use CBE for the sake of simplicity.

[^8]: Flattr is a microdonation web service:
    [http://flattr.com](styles.xml).

[^9]: Lawrence Page et al, ‘The PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing
    Order to the Web’, 1999.

[^10]: The following equations are a strong simplification, as there are
    more complex algorithms available. Still, for preliminary testing in
    a prototype and for the sake of communicating the concept, we’ll
    stick to those.

[^11]: Ronald R. Yager and Janusz Kacprzyk, *The Ordered Weighted
    Averaging Operators: Theory and Applications*, Kluwer: Norwell, MA,
    1997.

[^12]: This is already happening, albeit in a very limited way: e.g.
    Github provides free (*as in beer*) services to FLOSS accounts,
    Bambuser provides premium accounts to journalists and activists, and
    SafeCreative provides a restricted amount of ‘all rights reserved’
    registrations while an unrestricted amount for Creative Commons
    works.

[^13]: We refer here to market players as any entity that subsists
    within the market economy and operates mostly according to market
    logics.

[^14]: Of course, as more people contribute to the commons, the system
    might lead to a progressive drop in market price. Yet, this is only
    a marginal problem since market players maintain the right to update
    their commons policy at any time, in order preserve the ability to
    price-discrimination.

[^15]: David Cheal, *The Gift Economy*, New York: Routledge, 1988, pp.
    1-19; Lorna Gold, *The Sharing Economy: Solidarity Networks
    Transforming Globalisation*. Burlington: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd,
    2014; Michel Bauwens, ‘The Political Economy of Peer Production’,
    *CTheory*, Vol. 1, (2005); Yochai Benkler, *The Wealth of Networks*:
    *How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom*, New Haven:
    Tale University Press, 2006.

[^16]: Yochai Benkler, ‘Peer Production and Cooperation’, forthcoming in
    J.M. Bauer and M. Latzer (eds) *Handbook on the Economics of the
    Internet*, Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar, 2015.
