# The Economic Viability of Complementary Currencies: Bound to Fail?

# Beat Weber[^1]

Bitcoin and similar cryptocurrencies are the latest embodiments of a
longer history of attempts to establish something that is frequently
labeled as ‘complementary currency’ (CC). Complementary currencies are
issued by entitities other than national central banks and are intended
to circulate alongside official currencies, as well as occasionally
serving particular purposes thought to be underserved by official
currencies. To some, CC projects look like attractive shortcuts to solve
various problems. But almost all attempts ultimately fail to take off
after initial enthusiasm. Why?

In times of economic and financial crisis, the issue of money becomes
paramount. The number of people and areas where money is sparse is
increasing. The institutions specialized in handling money (banks and
the financial system in general) suffer from decreasing trust in the
wake of banking crises and their consequences: expensive public
assistance to stabilize the financial system, high debt burdens, and
receding credit availability. In this context, the appropriate level and
means of collective action to remedy the situation becomes an issue of
debate. In many grassroots circles, currency reformers propose what
seems to be a radical solution through the creation of one’s own
currency. Instead of engaging in the exhausting struggle for appropriate
national economic policies to remedy the situation, the creation of a
complementary currency seems to allow likeminded people to go it alone.
Such a currency project promises to bypass the resistance of established
powers and divided public opinion, and to help its users build their own
economic community.

Making the connection between political communities and currencies is
not unfounded: most currency areas in the current world coincide with
national borders, (the Euro being a noteable exception), so currencies
reflect community building around national states. If a nation is split
into divisive political camps, why not create communities around common
goals and create currencies to represent these communities in the
economic sphere? Indeed, grassroots complementary currency projects can
initiate enthusiasm and effort that promotes ties among community
members and in that way yield many social benefits.[^2] In democratic
theory, legitimacy can be conceived as input and output legitimacy.
Input legitimacy refers to the extent to which community members have a
voice in a project. Output legitimacy refers to the ability of the
project to deliver expected results. While complementary community
currencies can claim input legitimacy by building on participation of
community members, the question of output legitimacy is trickier. Can
complementary currencies work as money?

Money is the general equivalent in capitalism – commodities do not buy
each other, but all commodities can be bought with money. Based on this
status, money is used for three purposes: 1. As unit of account in which
prices are measured and compared in money. 2. As means of payment: goods
and services are purchased and debts settled with money. 3. As the most
liquid store of value. Facing an uncertain future with respect to their
income and their economic needs and obligations, people hold money to
insure themselves against unforeseen expenditures. In contrast to other
forms of storing wealth (real estate, financial assets, and other items
of value), money offers the advantage of being immediately available to
buy commodities. That feature is referred to as money’s superior
liquidity.[^3]

In general, the price system is based on the single unit of account. In
the Eurozone, all prices are calculated and displayed in Euro. This
aspect of money tends to be a monopoly within a currency area. The more
goods and services are denominated in a single unit of account, the
better people can compare prices among competing offers and get the best
value for their money.

Under one unit of account there can be several media of payment. While
the central bank is the issuer of money denominated in the unit of
account of the same name, claims on banks and other issuers of media of
payment circulate alongside central bank issued money. But banks as
issuers must guarantee a par relationship with cash (i.e. one Euro is
one Euro, irrespective of the form and issuer – cash or bank issued
non-cash).

Concerning the third aspect of money (store of value), many things can
be used to store value, money only being the most liquid one. Money in
this case is particularly important in situations of crisis, where
people may lose their faith in the value of everything except money.

In most of Europe, money consists today of notes, coins (i.e. cash) and
bookkeeping entries issued by the central bank and the sovereign mint,
and of bank deposits which represent a claim on the former. Most
payments among people in everyday life consist of bank deposit transfers
(while banks settle the resulting net balances among each other with
deposits at the central bank). In addition, transactions among
enterprises are sometimes based on mutual credit.

Banks as the most important issuers of media of payment in the modern
economy are subject to regulation and supervision by the state and the
central bank. The means of payment issued by banks and central banks can
be considered part of the same currency: they share the same unit of
account, banks strive to uphold their promise to exchange bank deposits
into cash on demand, and the issuing behaviour of banks is subject to
surveillance by authorities.

In contrast, complementary currencies could be characterized as means of
payment issued by entities that are not subject to coordination with
official money issuing authorities (state and central bank). Their media
of payment are not necessarily denominated in the official unit of
account and do not necessarily guarantee par relationship with official
currency.

To answer the question whether CCs can work as money, a typology of
possible meanings of complementarity is proposed as a first step and
illustrated with historical examples. In a second step, I discuss
determinants of succesful currencies in general.

## What Does Complementarity Mean?

Today, cash consisting of notes and coins is issued exclusively by the
state and its central bank in most currency areas. Banks issue checkable
deposits that serve as means of payment in everyday economic
transactions and are subject to state regulation and supervision.

Historically, the state was not always the sole issuer of cash. In many
English speaking and a few contintental European countries, private
banks issued their own notes in the 18th and 19th century, redeemable in
precious metal.[^4] Costly non-par exchange among competing issuers,
widespread counterfeiting and reocurring bank failures made the costs of
such a system so striking that public support grew for a stronger state
role.[^5]

But even after centralization, in a number of episodes in modern
economic history, complementary currencies issued by entities other than
the sovereign or banks have circulated. We can distinguish these
episodes by the CCs respective field of application, giving specific
meanings to the term *complementarity* in each.

### a) Complementarity With Respect to Specific Currency Denominations 

Examples include small denomination coins privately issued by shops and
bars to overcome shortage of small change in times when the availability
of official coins was impaired due to war, crisis, or specific policies.

In the U.S. in the 19th century, private banknote issue was dominant.
But banks were legally prevented from issuing small-denomination
banknotes.[^6] Merchants, farmers and companies filled the gap by
issuing paper currency notes and tokens in small denominations,
denominated in dollars, or goods and services rendered. These tokens
could be used to pay for products of the issuer and sometimes circulated
among the general public. The same happened during the U.S. civil war,
when inflation led the price of precious metals to rise above their
minted value in coins, causing metallic coins to disappear from
circulation. Eventually, authorities filled the temporary gap again, and
the use of private substitutes receded.[^7]

Many observers see small denomination online payments as a current
example where usage of official currency is impaired by high transaction
fees of payment service providers, opening a window for complementary
currencies. In this case, it is not the unavailability of official
currency in small denominations per se but the prevailing transaction
costs involved in making online payments, which may deter users from
making small denomination payments in official currency. Established
payment service providers (like Paypal, credit card firms, Western Union
etc.) charge fees for their services which can be so high in relation to
the payment sums as to deter small-sum transactions altogether. Filling
that gap is one of the uses which Bitcoin and similar cryptocurrency
schemes are designed for. By making the provision of payment services a
byproduct of competition among Bitcoin ‘miners’ for obtaining new
currency from the vault, transaction fees for users are kept very low in
the introductory phase of the project. In contrast to payment service
providers in official currencies, who have to recover their costs
through fees, the Bitcoin network compensates their service providers
with newly issued currency. Based on the expectation that limited supply
will increase Bitcoin’s value in terms of official currency, the network
has so far been able to attract sufficient volunteers (‘miners’) ready
to engage in that gamble, in turn enabling cheap transactions among
users of its payment network (that nevertheless entail considerable loss
risks).[^8]

### b) Complementarity With Respect to Specific Geographical Areas

There were a number of episodes in history where regions (or private
actors within regions) temporarily introduced complementary currencies
because they experienced shortage of cash in the wake of interruptions
of the financial infrastructure.

Mining and lumber companies of the 19th century in the U.S. and
elsewhere were often active in remote locations. Setting up company
towns and serving their staff through company stores, these companies
often issued their own currency (redeemable against goods in the company
store) to pay workers. They could thereby overcome costs and risks
involved in large distance transportation of physical currency,[^9] and
profit from the advantages in holding a local monopoly in offering
employment and goods, pricing them and issuing the means of payment.
Prisoner of war camps, military bases abroad and ships on long voyages
have also set up similar schemes. With growing reach of financial
infrastructure and the diffusion of electronic forms of payment, such
arrangements have become more or less superfluous.

During the Great Depression of the 1930s, banks in many regions closed
or restricted the amount of cash customers could withdraw after
experiencing runs on their deposits. To counter the resulting liquidity
shortages, many regional authorities in the U.S., Germany, Austria, and
other countries resorted to issuing so called ‘scrip money’. These were
means of payment denominated in the official unit of account and
redeemable for either proper money at a future date, for goods (as
offered either by the issuer or some other producers ready to accept
scrip) or as discharge of local tax liabilities.[^10] A similar
phenomenon was observed in Russia’s transition from a centrally planned
economy in the 1990s.[^11] In a political crisis concerning the state
budget in 2009, even the state of California resorted to issuing IOUs to
meet its short-term financial obligations for a few months.[^12] In the
recent crisis of 2008 –which in many ways was compared to the Great
Depression – policy makers in most industrialized countries took
measures to prevent deflation and breakdown of the financial
infrastructure comparable to the 1930s. In some countries though, policy
constraints prevented the use of such measures, leading to a renewed
interest in currency related innovations.

An often-cited modern case in this respect is Argentina. When Argentina
was hit by a financial crisis in 2001, access to bank accounts was
severely impaired, leading to a surge in surrogate means of payment.
Regional authorities issued scrip money and individuals joined barter
clubs, where club means of payment were issued to facilitate trade of
goods and services among members. After a few months, instances of fraud
and mismanagement within these arrangements and an improvement of
overall financial stability led to the decline of private complementary
currency use.[^13]

Some regional complementary projects aim at reducing leakage of
purchasing power and reorienting economic circulation towards the
regional level. As envisaged by currency reformer Silvio Gesell in the
1920s, some of these projects involve demurrage. These currencies
deliberately lose value over time, thereby encouraging their fast
circulation and discouraging hoarding. Sometimes such currencies are
taken up and seem partly succesful, to some extent because their novelty
factor makes them popular with tourists and currency collectors. But in
general they fail to cover much ground because they entail structural
problems. Offers, which prove uncompetitive on the market, cannot be
rendered competitive by offering potential customers a different
currency unless it gives access to a hidden form of price reduction,
i.e. when local currencies are de facto vouchers granting their users
discounts off list prices at local merchants. Typical regional
currencies offer less choice than official currency. At best they are
accepted by local merchants, and if they entail demurrage, they favor
fast consumption spending which might not be in line with consumers
preferences. Their use does not provide access to any goods that are
unavailable in official currency. So the network is smaller compared to
official currency, offering a smaller choice of uses. Those uses (i.e.
the goods and services accessible via the currency) are non-distinct
from the potential uses of official currency, and – in the case of
demurrage-based operation – the issuer deliberately impairs the
currency’s full functioning as money by making it useless for storing
wealth.

Making use of the currency mainly promises to contribute to the
collective good of regional prosperity, although that depends on whether
and how any additional incomes created by regional currency circulation
are distributed within the region. But if people before the introduction
of regional currency were not willing to ‘buy local’ with official
currency and instead preferred greater choice, why should they give up
official currency in favor of a complementary currency which offers less
choice? The discrepancy between people’s individual consumer preferences
and their wish for regional prosperity reflects a tension between
individual and collective rationality.

Introducing a regional currency does not eliminate this dilemma but
simply shifts it from the stage where consumption decisions are made
towards the stage where the means of payment are chosen. It is only
under specific circumstances that such a shift might indeed make a
difference. If the choice of the means of payment is exposed to greater
transparency and closer community surveillance, peer pressure could be
more effective than in the application on dispersed individual shopping
behavior. Regional currencies can also have a marketing effect that
raises awareness among potential users. But as long as the economy is
based on markets where individual choices of producers and consumers
determine outcomes, instead of collective decision making with binding
consequences for individuals, individual preferences are likely to
prevail whenever there is a dilemma between individual and collective
rationality.

Complementary currency projects with demurrage features assume that
money can be reduced to serve as means of payment in a process of mutual
exchange. Uncertainties deriving from the current reality of a
non-transparent economy, the decentralized decision making of private
property owners, and the implications for investors dependent on
expectation-based production efforts, are ignored. But in the modern
economy, money fulfills an essential function beyond being a means of
payment. Money is a unit of account, which is decisive for the formation
of comparable prices, and it is the most liquid store of value.
Liquidity offers a hedge against uncertainty intrinsic to a capitalist
market economy. Many reformers want to do away with this function
because if uncertainty increases and people make increased use of money
as store of value instead of investing it, money is hoarded and its
circulation slows. The consequence can be a fall in consumption and
investment and rising unemployment. Thus individually rational behavior
yields dysfunctional collective results.

In order to succesfully reduce uncertainty economic prospects must be
improved by economic policy. Depriving people of a store of value and
trying to force them to spend is not a means to protect against
uncertainty. Making money dysfunctional as store of value does not
encourage people to stop hoarding; they simply start searching for
different modes to preserve value or for a different kind of money.

### c) Complementarity With Respect to Specific Contracts

Suppliers can decide to make specific goods, services, and transaction
types more or less exlusively available through certain CCs. Examples
include currencies issued by computer game producers that give access to
virtual goods in online games, and private cryptocurrencies that enable
illegal transactions and tax evasion.

In virtual online games like World of Warcraft or Second Life, the
designers have introduced virtual currencies. In Second Life, users can
enter into transactions with each other using Linden Dollar. The
currency can be purchased from the game owner or from third party
exchanges and used to purchase virtual goods and services (as offered by
the game owner or other game users) within the game. The game owner
tries to keep a stable exchange rate with the US dollar by creating new
Linden Dollars as demand increases. In World of Warcraft, users can buy
equipment with digital ‘gold coins’ in order to help them advance in the
game. Digital coins are given away by the game owners as rewards for
succesful players. They can also be obtained by selling virtual
commodities produced or found by users. In addition, they can be
obtained on exchanges, where ‘gold farmers’ sell the products of their
in-game labour against official currency. In this way, players short on
time can outsource the time-intensive advancement in the game for their
online character by paying official currency. The work is typically done
by young gamers rich in time but poor in money from countries like China
and elsewhere. The game owners try to discourage and prevent the latter
kind of transactions.

Game owners issue these currencies in order to financially motivate
players, provide an incentive for customers to return once they have
accumulated certain wealth (‘lock-in’), and generate additional revenue
for themselves.[^14] The basis of game currency success is that their
issuers control access to goods in demand, which creates demand for the
currency among game users.

In some respects, anonymous cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and many of
its variants are further examples due to their offering anonymity in
making payments. Bitcoins do not have a central issuer but are issued by
a community of users from a stock according to predetermined rules
encoded in an open source software platform. The project does not offer
any goods for sale that are exclusively available through Bitcoin. While
Bitcoin and similar projects are intended by their inventors to rival
existing currencies in all kinds of transactions, their main advantage
as means of payment lies in transactions where there are reasons for
transaction partners to avoid official currency (apart from the small
denomination payments referred to above). In particular, money
laundering and transactions in illegal goods can benefit from the
anonymity offered by making payments in Bitcoin. (For regular consumer
and business transactions, a currency like Bitcoin will not be widely
used. When a currency is designed to increase in value over time, it is
better to hoard it, and pay current expenditure with a currency that is
more stable. Without an issuer guaranteeing a certain stability, Bitcoin
is underqualified to serve as unit of account.)

In projects like the Japanese Fureai kippu and other time bank projects
around the world, services like care work are evaluated based on labor
time spent and rewarded with a credit for the supplier which can be
spent at a future date on consumption of care benefits provided by other
network members. Many members seem to perceive care work contributed
under this system as being of superior quality, providing an incentive
to join. In contrast to industrial labor, general care work is not
subject to productivity differentials, making labor time spent a useful
unit of account comparable among persons and over time: spending one
hour with a person five years ago can be equalized with spending one
hour with another person in five years. In contrast, one hour of
industrial labor, for instance, in the garment industry may have
resulted in one T-shirt five years ago, but may result in five T-shirts
in five years, due to the continual technical advancement of machinery.
As a consequence, time bank arrangements can be suitable in settings
where one type of homogenous service of roughly constant quality is
exchanged among people who deliver their contribution at different
points in time. Their main challenge relates to uncertainty about
whether one’s own contributions can be exchanged at a future date for
some reciprocal service – depending on the attractiveness of the network
over time. When such arrangements attempt to include a broader range of
goods and services, they run into the problem that their unit of account
(units of labor time) does not make it profitable for all kinds of
service suppliers to exchange their services according to such
evaluation criterion. Would an experienced, productive craftsman be
prepared to exchange one hour of her labor for an hour of labor by an
apprentice? Would a doctor, who invested years of study, be prepared to
exchange one hour of her labor for an hour of labor by an unprofessional
care worker? Such issues typically trigger disputes over the appropriate
value standard and lead to the exit of suppliers that can get a better
deal in markets based on official currency.[^15]

### d) Complementarity With Respect to Specific Groups

In many grassroots campaigns, complementary currencies are envisaged as
a way to promote economic exchange among participants lacking jobs and
income in official currency. In local exchange trading systems (LETS),
complementary currencies are introduced to overcome market exclusion of
certain segments of the population or regional economic decline. While
sharing some features with regional currency projects referred to above,
their design does aim to a lesser extent at replacing official currency
in existing trading relationships within a whole region than in creating
new trading relationships among members of groups that may or may not be
located within a specific region. In this context, ‘a complementary
currency […] is an agreement to use something else than legal tender
(i.e. national money) as a medium of exchange, with the purpose to link
unmet needs with otherwise unused resources.’[^16]

Since the 1980s, there has been growing interest in such initiatives.
But while a number of grassroots projects have created early local
enthusiasm for such projects, none of them has flourished for long or
managed to reach a critical mass. Most falter after initial support
energies fade.[^17]

LETS networks use interest-free local credit, so direct bilateral
barter-like swaps do not need to be made. No physical money is issued,
but rather transactions are recorded in a central location open to all
members. As credit is issued by the network members, for the benefit of
the members themselves, LETS are considered mutual credit systems.[^18]

The main challenge is to attract a significant number of reciprocal
trade opportunities. Participants lacking alternative income sources
will be easy to attract. Their motive is to get access to goods and
services in high demand, but suppliers of the latter tend to have
alternative sources of income and tend to be deterred by the perceived
risk to lose out in LETS trades: the unemployed carpet cleaner and the
piano teacher might join in the hope of offering their services for
something they need, like food and clothing. But supermarkets offering
food and clothing will tend to prefer official currency in payment and
won’t be attracted by a network offering piano lessons, carpet cleaning
and related services in exchange for their products. As the Wikipedia
entry on LETS puts it, ‘Conventional national currency is generally hard
to earn, but easy to spend. To date LETSystems are comparatively easy to
earn, but harder to spend’.[^19]

## Why Currencies Are Accepted

Having reviewed experience and prospects of various approaches towards
complementary currencies, we can step towards some general observations
drawing on economic theory. As the economist Hyman Minsky once quipped,
‘Everyone can create his own currency, the problem is to have it
accepted’. If that is so, what determines the acceptance of a currency
by users?

In many accounts critical of existing monetary arrangements, it is
assumed that official money is forced on users, based on ‘legal tender’
status.[^20] But there is less behind this status than commonly
believed. If you use the official currency in payment you will be
protected by law against your transaction partner sueing you for
non-payment (unless the underlying contract specifies otherwise). And if
you print your own banknotes, you will be prosecuted for counterfeiting.
But you are free to agree on another means of payment than the official
currency with your transaction partner in a private transaction. As long
as you pay all applicable taxes in the official currency, you can, for
instance sell your car in exchange for socks, Bitcoins, or something
else. The episodes mentioned above meant to illustrate our typology,
show that time and again in modern economic history privately issued
currencies were able to gain foothold in the economy. So the legal
status of official currency does not necessarily imply a full currency
monopoly. In a world of multiple currencies there are always
alternatives available to some extent. The extent of their use depends
on the availability and advantages various currencies offer in
comparison to available alternatives. Whenever there is more than one
currency available, currencies must offer advantages to users in order
to gain und uphold their acceptance.

Among the four types of complementarity reviewed above, I identified
examples for successes and failures for all types except those based on
complementarity with respect to specific groups, where no successful
example was found. From the succesful examples, I can infer that CCs can
gain traction in two cases. The first case is where they fill a gap left
by official currency – when there are hurdles to accessing or using
official currency despite the presence of potential transactions among
solvent transaction partners. In such cases, even currencies inferior to
the official currency can gain acceptance due to lack of alternatives
(e.g. private currencies issued by employers in remote locations lacking
access to official currency). The second case is where CCs can claim
exclusivity over specific trades due to various reasons. The currency
issuer is a sought after contracting party, accepting only her own
currency in payment for goods and services she offers (for example,
in-game currencies sold to users by producers of popular computer
games); advantages of cost and/or convenience over official currency in
certain transactions (for example use of Bitcoin for small denomination
online payments and purchase of illicit goods). So CCs seem (at least
temporarily) successful in episodes where the official currency is
suddenly unavailable in cash, where it is not applicable at all towards
the trades concerned or its use is entangled with disadvantages in the
transactions concerned. But as the modest success of LETS shows, they
fare far less well when exposed to competition with official money.

Why is that? Returning to the functions of money introduced above, we
can expect a good currency to exhibit the following features: a unit of
account that covers the broadest possible range of commodities and
contracts, thereby enabling consumers to compare prices to get the best
deal. That is a central reasoning behind the introduction of the Euro as
common currency for the European Community’s common market; prices in
Spain and Finland can now be compared without having to confront
conversion rates, conversion costs and fluctuating exchange rates.

Concerning the means of payment and store of value function, we can
expect users to choose a currency which is as widely accepted as
possible, and which can best be expected to keep its value over time,
making it also the most liquid store of value (at least for short
periods of time).

The features described above imply that, if several currencies offer the
same access to goods and services, it would be inefficient for users to
use all or many of them in parallel unless they can be considered
perfect equivalents (sharing the same unit of account and credibly
keeping par relationship among each other). If different currency
issuers offer different units of account, currency competition will
ensue. If faced with a choice among competing currencies, a currency
user has to form expectations about the behavior of two (groups of)
actors, the issuer and other users. Currencies can be conceived as
networks comparable to telephone networks–the benefits of using a
specific currency for each individual grows with the service quality of
the network and the number of participants. If one among several
competing networks of comparable quality succeeds in reaching a critical
mass of initial users, they will soon achieve a position that is very
hard to contest by competitors. If there are competing value standards,
we can expect people to prefer the standard which holds its value over
at least shorter periods of time and which covers the most (and the most
attractive) goods and services. The possibility and credibility of the
issuer to assure the quality of a currency, and the likelihood of other
users adopting it are therefore decisive features in currency network
competition.[^21]

### 

### The Role of the Issuer

The issuer can promote the acceptance of its currency by offering
contracts (concerning goods, services or liabilities) in high demand
among potential users against payment of its own currency, and by
credibly promising to stabilize the purchasing power of the currency
over time.

How is the stability of money’s purchasing power assured? Money issuers
have used different mechanisms to signal a commitment towards future
stability. The choice depends on the available options and various
political economy considerations. Historically, in uncertain times
characterized by war, shifting political authorities and general
mistrust, precious metal has been used as monetary base. In the 20th
century, after the consolidation of national states and currencies, and
the democratization of states, it has been possible to decouple the
issuance of money from metal backing. Checks and balances against
irresponsible monetary practice now seem in many cases to be sufficient
to stabilize expectations that ensure trust in unbacked currencies. That
was considered a welcome development, because stabilization of
purchasing power in a dynamic economy characterized by permanent change
requires permanent adjustment by the issuer. Under such circumstances,
tying currency issuance to some scarce metal has inconveniences. It
takes away the flexibility to adjust the means of payment to the needs
of a growing economy. Without that restriction, stability with respect
towards metallic reserves in the vault of monetary authorities makes way
for the more useful notion of stability with respect to the evolving
development of the economy, i.e. stability in terms of purchasing power.
Such stability can be expected over the short term only, though. Over
the longer term, rarely any currency in the 20th century has kept
constant purchasing power. This is not a defect, because a functioning
economy is not well served by too much encouragement for storing wealth
in cash over longer periods. Instead, it requires people to invest their
savings either directly in business enterprises or indirectly via
financial intermediaries in order to stimulate economic activity. So
over the long term, inflation must be low enough to prevent users from
searching out alternative currencies, and high enough in order to
encourage the accumulation of wealth by investing instead of hoarding
cash.

In industrialized countries, central banks steer the provision of cash
and its electronic substitutes by the financial system according to
public mandates. The ability to stabilize complementary currencies
depends on their issuing principles. In regional currency arrangements,
issuing 1:1 against official currency is common. In mutual credit
clearing arrangements, credit is issued in the process of exchange
against supply of goods and services. Other concepts envisage backing by
natural resources. In order to assist in stabilizing their currency’s
value, many complementary currency issuers try to restrict the formation
of a private market where units of complementary currencies could be
sold at a discount against official currency. The disadvantage of such a
restriction is that the lack of ability to get out of the currency can
deter potential users to get in in the first place. The concept of
Bitcoin is different. Based on a unit of account without any stable
reference towards another currency or some sort of backing, its supply
is subject to an arbitrary upper limit to be reached over time. When the
number of users grows, its value in terms of other currencies can be
expected to grow – that’s the signal Bitcoin wants to send to potential
users in order to attract them. The currency’s purchasing power is
completely determined by supply and demand in private currency markets.
The resulting volatility of its exchange rate with other currencies
makes for an interesting speculative object, but is detrimental for
being used as unit of account and means of payment, two of the central
functions of money.

Many CCs offer design features that depart from those of established
currencies, and which would become operational once CCs are in
circulation. The problem is that many such features (e.g. automatic loss
of value over time, limited acceptability etc.) prevent such CCs to
become accepted by users in the first place. While Bitcoin is quite
unique among CCs in having strong features to attract users (i.e. the
promise of value appreciation), its design is oblivious to the fact that
precisely these features make its use as money unattractive.

Sharing the same unit of account with the official currency can increase
chances of a CC’s acceptance (because it then benefits from the price
system established under the main currency). Convertibility with the
official currency also does (because having the exit option reduces the
odds of entry for users), but limits autonomy in issuance because the
latter has to operate under the constraint of keeping par relationship
with official currency. The issuer must be able to always redeem the CC
in official money 1:1. Still, issuers of payment media in the official
unit of account must offer some adavantage to users in order to actually
get acceptance. For instance, paying by bank deposit transfer instead of
cash offers advantages in large value payments (because the alternative
– carrying around a suitcase full of cash – is inconvenient and risky)
and in transactions where buyer and seller do not physically meet.

Having a different unit of account than the official currency (like
Bitcoin does) creates barriers between currencies, as their exchange
rate can be subject to significant fluctuations. The risks associated
with the latter feature is a user deterrent unless the CC’s unit of
account can lay exclusive claim on sought after commodities.

### What Currency Users Expect

Apart from the issuer, the behavior of other users is decisive for
individual decision making about whether to accept a certain currency.
Will I be able to spend the money received for something I want to buy
at a later date? Only if an individual user can expect that a
significant number of her potential transaction partners will accept
that currency for payment of goods, services and liabilities, she will
be prepared to accept that currency herself.

Among users, some are more important than others. Users offering
contracts in high demand by other users make a more significant
contribution to the attractiveness of the network than others when
switching to the network’s unit of account. If one groceries shopkeeper
accepts a certain currency in payment, that is a higher contribution to
the attractiveness of the currency in question than the willingness to
accept of ten of my neighbors who have no specific supplies to offer. In
other words, a network’s attractiveness consists in the kind and range
of goods, services and debt contracts it allows access to, and the
conditions under which a currency offers this access (i.e. evolution of
purchasing power, and transaction costs related to making payments in
that currency).

The modern state is in most cases succesful in issuing its own currency
and having it accepted, not due to its monopoly of force, but because it
is usually the single biggest economic entity in the economy and it
collects taxes on economic activity to finance public services. By
accepting exclusively the sovereign currency in tax payments, states
create a substantial demand for their own money. If a shop owner has to
pay her taxes in Euro, she will likely want to be paid by her customers
in Euro. And by being a significant player in the national market (by
employing people in public administration and contracting public works),
the state creates a lot of income within the population paid in official
currency. These factors are likely to create a critical mass of currency
users, which is decisive for the development of network effects. Even
for people that are initially free from tax obligations, the
establishment of an initial network of taxpaying state currency users
can make joining the network attractive. Because taxes are usually paid
on economic activity, the tax-initiated network is at the same time a
network consisting of attractive suppliers of goods and services: you
can only tax when there is production and trade going on among citizens.

### Elements of Monetary Networks 

By relying on network effects, the state establishes its unit of account
as the standard measure of value in the economy. All the prices for
goods, services and debt contracts will be denominated in the official
currency. It also issues coins and notes (usually via the central bank
and mint) that function as means of payment in economic transactions and
discharge of debt obligations.

With respect to means of payment, the central bank and mint are not the
exclusive issuers. Balances in bank accounts are claims on money, which
can be used instead of cash in payments among citizens. The balances
resulting from the transfer of credit among banks on behalf of their
customers are settled in central bank money. As long as people’s cash
needs stay within usual limits, banks can operate payments, grant credit
and incur liabilities in the form of checking and saving accounts while
holding only a fraction of their balance sheet in cash. In order for
this system to be stable, banks have to make sure that the public’s
trust in their ability to convert balances in deposit accounts into
cash, i.e. to fulfill claims on money held by the public, is upheld.

In a way, the use of bank deposits as means of payment could be
considered a complementary currency. But its relationship to central
bank money entails a peculiar hierarchical feature. By being a claim on
money, bank account balances are denominated in the official unit of
account and must be managed by banks with a view to keep par
relationship with central bank money. Banks usually offer depositors
interest rates as compensation for the risk involved in parting with
cash, the most liquid form of value. Deposit insurance and eventual
crisis back-up by state institutions assist in maintaining the promise
of par relationship. In turn, banks submit to regulation, supervision
and are subject to monetary policy operated by central banks. When trust
in banks evaporates, customers may start to doubt whether their deposits
are still of equivalent value to money, and reject banks’ means of
payment. A run on the bank’s cash reserves can ensue – customers try to
exercise their deposit claims on cash in huge numbers, eventually
surpassing the cash reserves of the bank concerned and bringing it down.

The ability for credit to act as money substitute is not restricted to
credit issued by banks. For instance, inter-company loans such as trade
credit granted among firms represents a significant part of the
liabilities of the industrial sector.[^22] When firms issuing
liabilities have good reputation, their debt might even circulate as
means of payment among other firms.

But among credit forms, bank credit is the most developed one. Banks
specialize in collecting and assessing information about
creditworthiness of all kinds of borrowers. By pooling the resulting
promises to pay and being subject to regulation and supervision, bank
liabilities usually enjoy the highest degree of trustworthiness among
credit forms, ranking highest among other money substitutes in the
hierarchy established by the prevailing unit of account. The issuers of
credit claims promise full payment of the nominal amount in official
currency, and try to establish a reputation by repeatedly making good on
that promise.

Deep political and economic crises often entail monetary crisis. In such
a case, the arrangements in place for keeping the promise of value
stability are shattered. If instability surpasses a certain threshold
(e.g. in episodes of hyperinflation), users can be induced to look for
alternatives. In many economically weak countries in economic history,
currency substitution has taken place. Would such a deteriorating
performance pose a chance for rivaling CCs based on private initiative?
The answer tends to be no. Usually, substitutes are almost exclusively
chosen from among the rank of other state supported currencies.[^23]
Private CCs are inevitably positioned at the bottom of the hierarchy of
credit claims. In a situation of eroding trust in the national currency
at the top of the domestic credit hierarchy, users usually try to
exchange national currency for a currency further up the international
hierarchy, not a private one of lower hierarchical status. It is bigger
existing networks and a more credible stability track record that
typically attract users. Therefore, we can observe ‘Dollarization’,
‘Euroization’, etc. in small countries suffering from lack of public
trust in their official currency, instead of a spread of private
start-up currencies.

## Conclusion

The criteria of capitalism and the criteria of democratic civil society
often clash. There are segments in the economy, which are not appraised
by the market despite being considered a useful contribution to public
welfare by many members – care work and art are just two. Some regions
experience economic distress that triggers social crisis. Time and
again, the whole economy experiences crisis, which leads to hardship
among the population. Poor groups are permanently disadvantaged by the
inequality resulting from the normal operation of markets. The
traditional solution for such tensions is taxing market income and
wealth or incurring government debt, and using the proceeds to finance
government transfers to correct market outcomes considered incompatible
with democratic will. The distributional issues involved in such
measures can lead to a thorny political process hindered by tax
resistance, divided opinion about what is to be considered of public
value etc. Could a complementary currency provide a short-cut towards an
alternative solution, offering a route for a minority to express value
appraisals differing from those of the rest of society?

Complementary currencies can work if they are able to provide exclusive
access to certain transactions (or exclusive benefits in relation to
such transactions like discounts or anonymity) with respect to their
content, their location, their size or the transaction partners,
provided there is sufficient solvent demand for such transactions.

Absent such attractions, keeping a CC in use requires measures to
decouple community members from the rest of the economy, which goes
beyond the mere introduction of a currency. But even in that case,
alternative economic circuits revolving around CCs will need official
currency to pay for taxes and at least some imported commodities from
the outside world. This requirement entails difficult choices involving
the means of acquiring outside currency and managing the implications
this has for the loyalty of CC community members and the management of
exchange rates with the official currency. Because decentral entities
issuing complementary currencies usually lack powerful instruments like
capital controls, legal tender laws or taxing authority, they must
either attract voluntary users with economic features that prevail in
competition with official currency, or they must induce people to
substitute individual economic motives by collective values enforced by
peer pressure or non-economic benefits.

Of course, community members can choose to adopt complementary
currencies despite they would fail to prevail in competition against
competing currency networks according to purely economic criteria.
Whether such non-economic motives can prevail over economic advantages
of joining official currency networks is an empirical question that
cannot be settled once and for all. But it has to be kept in mind that
enforcement mechanisms to foster community participation can gain a
repressive character beyond a certain limit. And while social and
community building effects may be considered successful features of
complementary currency projects which go beyond economic aspects,[^24]
possible disputes among network members over valuation standards,
distribution of benefits and governance issues are also part of the
reality of CCs which have to be included in any assessment.

Transregional monetary networks are an expression of advanced societal
division of labor in capitalism, governed by profit expectations. They
can bring advantages in terms of profit making, specialization,
efficiency and quality improvements. But they also entail transregional
dependency of people across the globe from each other, which is
especially felt in crisis. The autonomy of any economic project that
does not completely decouple from this global division of labor can only
be relative.

If currency areas are not congruent with the division of labor, local
currency users who want to benefit from the translocal system are faced
with costs (for exchanging the currency, coping with exchange rate risk,
etc.). The smaller these currency areas, the more pronounced these
costs. All people hoping to benefit from the wider system will try to
avoid that cost.

If a currency circulates within a stable network of users, monetary
policy is possible by the issuer, which has a bearing on economic
activity. But issuing a complementary currency is not an instrument able
to force the economy to work according to different rules. The
capitalist economy works based on competition among unequal private
property owners, resulting in production, transactions and wealth
accumulation accounted for and paid in money. The supply of money can
have effects on these processes, but on its own it is not a means to
alter their logic.

Some CC projects are based on the hope that a different currency can
stop the growth of inequality, thought as being triggered by the
accumulation of money and the alleged tendency of money to grow through
the compound interest mechanism.[^25] But such an approach rests on the
conflation of money and wealth. Wealthy people do not hoard cash or bank
accounts to a large extent.[^26] The primary form of wealth in
capitalism is business ownership and income derived from owning or
managing firms, as well as housing property and various financial
assets. None of these are touched upon by reforming money. Inequality is
not the result of monetary distortions of the market but of its normal
functioning, assisted by a very benign tax treatment of wealth and its
private transfer among generations. This wealth is the result of
profit-oriented production based on private property and free labor,
organized by competition on markets. Money symbolizes, measures, stores,
and transfers wealth. Manupulating or reforming money does not yield an
economy based on different principles. The expectation that through
reformed money, the market would turn into a neutral forum of exchange
among independent, small and equal individual producers is subject to
disappointments.

## References

Blanc, Jérôme.‘Classifying “CCs”: Community, Complementary and Local
Currencies’ Types and Generations’, *International Journal of Community
Currency Research* 15 (2011) D 4-10,
<https://ijccr.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/ijccr-2011-special-issue-02-blanc.pdf>.

Champ, Bruce. *Private Money in Our Past, Present, and Future*,
<http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2007/010107.cfm>.

Champ, Bruce. *Stamp Scrip: Money People Paid to Use*,
<http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2008/0408.pdf>.

Cohen, Benjamin. *The Future of Money*, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2006.

ECB – European Central Bank. *Virtual Currency Schemes*, Frankfurt,
2012.

Greco, Thomas. *The End of Money and the Future of Civilization*, White
River Junction: Chelsea Green Publishing (Kindle Edition), 2009.

Ingham, Geoffrey. *The Nature of Money*, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2004.

Itoh, Makoto and Costas Lapavitsas. *Political Economy of Money and
Finance*, Hampshire and London: MacMillan Press, 1999.

Mehrling, Perry. ‘The Inherent Hierarchy of Money’, in Lance Taylor,
Armon Rezai, and Thomas Michl (eds) *Social Fairness and Economics:
Economic Essays in the Spirit of Duncan Foley,* New York: Routledge,
2012, pp. 394-404.

Paul, Axel T. ‘Die Legitimität des Geldes’, *Leviathan* 21 (2002):
109-129.

Piketty, Thomas. *Capital in the 21st Century*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press (Kindle Edition), 2014.

Schmitz, Stefan W. ‘Will Central Banking Survive Electronic Money?’, in
Stephen Millard, Andrew Haldane and Victoria Saporta (eds) *The Future
of Payments*, London: Routledge, 2007, pp. 233-254.

Seyfang, Gill and Noel Longhurst. ‘Money, Money, Money? A Scoping Study
of Grassroots Complementary Currencies for Sustainability’, *3S Working
Paper,* 2012.

Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of
Central Banks. Corporate Finance and Economic Activity in The Euro Area.
Structural Issues Report, *ECB Occasional Paper Series* 151, (2013).

Weber, Beat. ‘Can Bitcoin Compete With Money?’, *Journal of Peer
Production* 4 (2014),
<http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-4-value-and-currency/invited-comments/can-bitcoin-compete-with-money/>.

Weber, Warren E. ‘The Efficiency of Private E-money-like Systems: The
U.S. Experience with State Bank Notes’, *Bank of Canada Working Paper*,
2014-15.

White, Lawrence H. ‘Competing Money Supplies’, in David R. Henderson
(ed.) *The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics*, Indianapolis: Liberty
Fund, 2007, pp. 71-73.

Woodruff, David. ‘Monetary Surrogates and Money's Dual Nature’, in
Jocelyn Pixley and G.C.Harcourt (eds) *Financial Crises and the Nature
of Capitalist Money. Mutual Developments from the Work of Geoffrey
Ingham,* Houndsmill/New York: Palgrave, 2013, pp. 101-123.

[^1]: The views expressed in this text do not necessarily coincide with
    those of my employer. I am grateful to Stefan Schmitz for comments
    on an earlier draft of this paper.

[^2]: Gill Seyfang and Noel Longhurst, ‘Money, Money, Money? A Scoping
    Study of Grassroots Complementary Currencies for Sustainability’,
    *3S Working Paper*, 2012.

[^3]: Geoffrey Ingham, *The Nature of Money*, Cambridge: Polity Press,
    2004; Makoto Itoh and Lapavitsas Costas, *Political Economy of Money
    and Finance*, Hampshire and London: MacMillan Press, 1999.

[^4]: Lawrence H. White, ‘Competing Money Supplies’, in David R.
    Henderson (ed.) *The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics*,
    Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2007, pp. 71-73; Stefan W. Schmitz,‘Will
    Central Banking Survive Electronic Money?’, in Stephen Millard,
    Andrew Haldane, and Victoria Saporta (eds) *The Future of Payments*,
    London: Routledge, 2007, pp. 233-254.

[^5]: Warren E. Weber, ‘The Efficiency of Private E-money-like Systems:
    The U.S. Experience With State Bank Notes’, *Bank of Canada Working
    Paper*, 2014-15.

[^6]: The reason for this ban can be found in an attempt by banks to
    install a disciplining device against banknote overissuance. In the
    system under consideration, banknotes had to be redeemable in gold
    held by banks. With large-denomination notes, so the argument went,
    the public would have a greater incentive to continually redeem them
    in gold. Small denomination notes on the other hand would circulate
    for too long a time, therefore offering banks an incentive to
    overissue them.

[^7]: Bruce Champ, *Private Money in Our Past, Present, and Future*,
    [http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2007/010107.cfm](numbering.xml).

[^8]: Beat Weber, ‘Can Bitcoin Compete With Money?’, *Journal of Peer
    Production* 4 (2014),
    [http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-4-value-and-currency/invited-comments/can-bitcoin-compete-with-money/](styles.xml).

[^9]: Bruce Champ, *Private Money in Our Past, Present, and Future*,
    2007,
    [http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2007/010107.cfm](stylesWithEffects.xml).

[^10]: Bruce Champ, *Stamp Scrip: Money People Paid to Use*, 2008,
    [http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2008/0408.pdf](settings.xml).

[^11]: David Woodruff, ‘Monetary Surrogates and Money’s Dual Nature’, in
    Jocelyn Pixley and G.C.Harcourt (eds) *Financial Crises and the
    Nature of Capitalist Money. Mutual Developments from the Work of
    Geoffrey Ingham,* Houndsmill and New York: Palgrave, 2013, pp.
    101-123.

[^12]: See
    [http://www.sco.ca.gov/eo\_news\_registeredwarrants.html](webSettings.xml).

[^13]: Thomas Greco, *The End of Money and the Future of Civilization*,
    White River Junction: Chelsea Green Publishing (Kindle Edition),
    2009, p. 2943.

[^14]: ECB (European Central Bank), *Virtual Currency Schemes*,
    Frankfurt, 2012.

[^15]: Ingham, *The Nature of Money*, p. 185.

[^16]: Wikipedia, ‘Complementary Currency’,
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complementary\_currency](footnotes.xml),
    accessed 17 August 2014.

[^17]: Jérôme Blanc, ‘Classifying “CCs”: Community, Complementary and
    Local Currencies’ Types and Generations’, *International Journal of
    Community Currency Research* 15 (2011) D 4-10,
    [https://ijccr.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/ijccr-2011-special-issue-02-blanc.pdf](endnotes.xml);
    Greco, *The End of Money and the Future of Civilization*, p. 2659.

[^18]: Wikipedia, ‘Local Exchange Trading System’,
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local\_exchange\_trading\_system](https://ijccr.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/ijccr-2011-special-issue-02-blanc.pdf),
    accessed 23 November 2014.

[^19]: Wikipedia, ‘Local Exchange Trading System’,
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local\_exchange\_trading\_system](http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commentary/2007/010107.cfm),
    accessed 23 November 2014.

[^20]: Greco, *The End of Money and the Future of Civilization Money and
    the Future,* p. 2079.

[^21]: Benjamin Cohen, *The Future of Money*, Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 2006, p. 11.

[^22]: Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European
    System of Central Banks, ‘Corporate Finance and Economic Activity in
    The Euro Area’, Structural Issues Report 2013, *ECB Occasional Paper
    Series* 151 (2013): 7.

[^23]: Cohen, *The Future of Money*, p. 25.

[^24]: Axel T. Paul, ‘Die Legitimität des Geldes’, *Leviathan* 21
    (2002): pp. 109-129.

[^25]: Greco, *The End*, p. 2032.

[^26]: Thomas Piketty, *Capital in the 21st Century*, Cambridge, MA:
    Harvard University Press (Kindle Edition), 2014.

