---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Wild, Wild West: A View From Two California Schoolmarms 

# Bill Maurer and Lana Swartz

People who work in payments innovation are really into the Wild West.
Since 2008, when the industry started to heat up, we've heard them say,
over and over again and across contexts, that ‘it’s a Wild West out
there’, or ‘we are in the Wild West’. Sometimes they use it in marketing
material, where it evokes the exciting, the new. Other times, they use
it in terms of compliance, where it means that the legal or regulatory
environment is murky, unsettled. Usually, these two discourses wind up
being two sides of the same coin: the Wild West is a land of opportunity
where anything goes and fortune favors those who can afford to take
risks. That is, at least until the regulator shows up, the sheriff (or
maybe the schoolmarm) riding into town.

The Wild West talk goes even further. Metaphors that are used in the
payments industry to describe its networks and technologies often come
directly out of 19th century Western expansion of the United States of
America. There is talk of gold rushes, of land grabs, of railroads, of
pioneers. It suggests something deeper: an unsettling of old
allegiances, perhaps, an opening of new frontiers and the shaking loose
of some of the conventions of person, property, state, and market.

## Payment

‘Payment’ is conceptually and practically distinct from ‘exchange’.
Anthropology, the field to which at least one of us belongs, is built on
notions of exchange. In the classic work *The Gift,* Marcel Mauss set
forth the basic understanding that human sociality is solidified through
various exchanges of one kind or another, of shells or money or other
sorts of valuables or gifts or kin, ramifying social relations in
enduring webs of obligation.[^1] Through our research in the payments
industry, however, we have had to rethink this exchange-centrism.

The payments industry is the set of business and government entities
that facilitate the transfer of value from point A to point B any time
you are not using cash or coin, that is, any time you’re not using
state-issued tokens representing fiat currency. From your employer to
your bank account in the form of your electronic paycheck; from your
credit card account to a merchant whenever you use a plastic card to pay
for something; from a person to another person when a sending electronic
credits via text message in a mobile money service like Kenya’s M-Pesa.

Payment is different from exchange. With exchange, there is usually a
transaction in which people are equilibrating values. This is the old
barter story. I’ve got some pigs, you’ve got some yams. We’re going to
exchange. We have to do a kind of calculation to figure out how many
pigs for how many yams. Payment is a separate process: once we have
decided how to calibrate the value of our items, how do I get the value
that’s embodied in my pigs over to you, and then get the value embodied
in your yams over to me? It seems almost trivial. In the mythical barter
situation, the payment infrastructure is our hands, the baskets in which
we place the yams, the stick we use to herd the pigs. In a cash
exchange, similarly, it is the hands that facilitate payment. I take
cash in my hand. I give it to your hand. We have transferred value.

With non-cash payments, it’s not so simple, or trivial. We need network
infrastructures built, maintained, gated, and tolled by all the diverse
players in payments: card networks, point of sale device manufacturers,
payment processors, billing companies, wire services, application
developers, mobile network operators, and government-mandated systems,
too. Payments innovators are looking for opportunities in the transit of
value. Some of them are looking for opportunities in the medium of
exchange, too – to supplement or even replace state-issued currencies.
Wild West indeed!

## The Old West

Even when it is not overtly referred to, visions of the ‘wild west’ are
summoned in many ways in today's payments industry. For example, the
Visa network is routinely described as a set of ‘rails’, referring to
transcontinental railroads that moved people, news, mail, currency, and
gold across the widening United States and, in most grand narratives,
consolidated it as a nation.

Eventually, in the actual Wild West, the actual rails were regulated as
‘common carriers’, private utilities operating in the public interest.
Farmers, who depended on this new infrastructure to transport their
goods to market and whose land had been ceded to build the rails,
demanded universal service, freedom from price discrimination, and
reasonable expectation of safe delivery. Regulation also arose to
protect the nascent United States Postal Service, which was in
competition with private express shipping cartels – who rode the
infrastructure and colluded with the railroads and each other.

In the early 21st century, the language and principle of common carriage
was ported onto telecommunication infrastructure. In the United States
(at least at time of writing) and other countries, Internet Service
Providers are obliged to treat all data equally, to not discriminate in
terms of price or speed according to user, site, or platform.

But the most direct descendant of ‘rails’ is not the internet but the
payments industry. By the start of the 20th century, the private
expresses were threatened by competition from the telegraph, but they
had already moved on to a new, lucrative, and unregulated way to move
value: Money Orders for the poor, the immigrant, and the illiterate and
Travelers' Checks for the elite. Crucially, the ‘float’ – the money left
over each month from checks not yet cashed – could be invested at
interest. During World War I, the private express industry was
nationalized. With little incentive to remain in the shipping business,
the cartels officially consolidated as American Express and focused on
their payments services and financial activities.[^2] The modern
payments industry was born.

No private infrastructure industry wants to be regulated as serving the
public good. Railroads, private expresses, Western Union, and internet
service providers have all resisted – with varied success – becoming a
common carrier. No private rails want to be, as they put it in the
telecom industry, a ‘dumb pipe’. All private rails seek rents and
control. The payments industry is no different. Today – in internet and
payment alike – the rents sought are increasingly not just fees but
data. Personal and social data, to be used for the purposes of marketing
and modeling, is described in the payments industry and beyond as
‘gold’, another Wild West throwback.

So, when we hear tell of new moneys build on data collection or its
circumvention – be it American Express points or bitcoins – we think of
‘wildcat bankers’ who issued notes to pioneers backed by dubious
reserves. We also think of a Twitter exchange by some of our payment
industry interlocutors. One wrote of the current explosion of innovation
in payments, ‘In a gold rush, you can mine for gold or sell
shovels’.[^3] Another countered, ‘Or set up a bank’.[^4] Another
offered, ‘You could sell treasure maps too. Today we call that
consulting’.[^5] If we were wearing our capitalist black Stetsons
instead of our schoolmarm bonnets, we might suggest that if they really
wanted to be the winning robber barons in this metaphor, they might
consider a railroad.

## 

## The *Old* Old West

There is another Wild West worth considering: the far west of the
Achaemenid Empire that stretched from India to Anatolia under kings like
Darius and Xerxes. Some of the world’s first metal coins come from the
west of that empire, Lydia and Ionia in what is now Turkey. State
authorities issued ancient coins bearing an image of the king –
sometimes standing, sometimes kneeling; with a spear, or a bow and
arrow. Yet users of those coins marked them with their own insignia,
tiny counterstamps indicating... what? The answer is not entirely clear.
These were definitely not test cuts – gouges into a coin to ensure it
was solid silver or gold. Many of the marks are intricate, delicate,
beautiful abstract designs, small hands, lion’s paws.

Remember that the earliest moneys were not tokens but records, receipts
inscribed on cuneiform tablets, more like contracts or letters of credit
than cash or coin.[^6] These were also often held centrally, by
religious or state authorities, in storehouses where grain or silver or
tribute items might also be maintained. Did the early users of this new
Wild West technology, the coin, feel compelled to write their own
stories on them, mark their own debts and obligations? Or simply
proclaim their status (‘I have a scale, and I have weighed this coin.
Here is my mark’.). Such proclamation would suggest a world where rank
trumps the kind of calculability we have traditionally associated with
money tokens.

Perhaps those placing their marks on the early coins were still living
in a ledger-based mentality, unfamiliar with the idea that there could
be an unmediated means of exchange, a form of payment without an obvious
infrastructure. Perhaps they did not fully understand that the coin
could be a state issued, anonymous means of exchange that required no
payment infrastructure other than the king’s mints and the hands, bags,
and maybe scales and weights of their daily exchange.

The state part of the story is important in this early history of coin,
and it is what some payments innovators today are chafing against. For
kings like modern states would exact taxes or tribute in their own
token, an expression of political sovereignty that also exercised
economic control. We think back to those marked coins, however, this
desire to write, to make records. Because there is a growing awareness
again today that money is nothing but records, after all. At least in
some quarters. Not a commodity unto itself, but a database – a book of
credits and debits, a statement of transactions.[^7]

## New Rails

If, in that Anatolian Wild West, people were inscribing on coins their
own marks as if to re-make the coin into a kind of tablet, today among
payments innovators, people are remaking the tablets. They are doing so,
also, in a game of status and rank: against each other (Google versus
Apple; Dwolla versus PayPal; Heartland versus FirstData; Verifone versus
Ingenico), against the banks, and – crucially – against the states that
still issue and warrant currency and mandate the fairness and function
of some of the rails and provide oversight of all of them.

But banks and states are still important. Today in the United States,
the Automated Clearing House facilitates more than 60 percent of
non-cash payments by value (all those paychecks!), though debit cards
account for almost 40 percent of non-cash payments by number of
transactions (all those small purchases at the point of sale!).[^8] The
ACH is a federally-mandated interbank network responsible for clearing
and settling transfers between bank accounts. The debit card networks
developed from the automatic teller machine (ATM) networks built by the
banks to make it easier and cheaper to get money to account holders.[^9]

Payments innovators come from another place. Many of them come from the
Wild West – at least as far as the American continent is concerned – the
information technology, start-up culture, and venture capital associated
with the northern part of the State of California: gold rush territory.
Even VISA, now the most mundane of payment rails, was, in the 1970s,
envisioned as a radical disruption by its San Francisco-based founder
and feared by traditional bank executives.[^10] First PayPal in the late
1990s, and now ApplePay in 2014, a host of new companies have come into
being since 2008 seeking to jump into payments.

Why? A convergence of inspirational stories, new possibilities, and one
giant financial crisis. The mobile telecommunications provider Safaricom
lauched M-Pesa in 2008, a service that allowed Kenyans to send small
amounts of money to one another via their simple mobile phones. It took
the country by storm, and was widely reported in the tech and business
media in the global North. And then there was the iPhone, Apple’s foray
into mobile telephony unleashing a burst of application development and
a new business model, as well as revealing the possibilities of taking
high-powered computing mobile. Why did the global financial crisis
matter for payments? For one thing, it further eroded public confidence
in banks: banking itself, as an overarching ‘brand’, suffered. For
another, it actively pushed more and more people out of conventional
banking and into alternative financial services –from pawnshops to check
cashing services and payday lenders, as well as prepaid payment cards.
Entrepreneurial folk looking at payments started to see opportunity in
non-bank provision of money services. Among payments innovators, there
was a palpable sense that anything was possible. Who needs banks? Who
even needs money – the state kind, anyway?

## New Territories

Much payment innovation is taking place in the domain of
person-to-person payments, seeking an M-Pesa type service for the Global
North, and purchases at the physical world point of sale, seeking an
alternative to cash and cards at the merchant’s till. The latter has
been described to us as a ‘last commons’, an as-yet unfenced field of
potential personal transactional data, ripe for ‘mining’.

The payments game, in other words, is being played over databases: who
shall collect, fence, own, leverage the commons of transactional data
currently locked up in cash purchases? Who will bring purchase histories
together with payment information together with locational, credit,
social network, or other histories? David Stearns chronicles how fights
between big merchants and the emerging card networks led to the
development of different technological standards for inventory and
payment.[^11] The stores, using optical scanner technology, gained
access to what consumers were buying, but only in their own shop or
franchise. The networks, using magnetic stripe technology on plastic
cards, could know levels of spending and locations, but would not get
information on the details of each purchase. The legacy of this split
endures: some payments innovators base their technology on optical
scanning, generating QR codes or bar codes on mobile devices; others
embed data-generating technology in the form factor of the device
itself, with near-field communication chips. Wherever you see the
former, be on the lookout for ‘merchant’ interests; where you see the
latter, look for the card networks and the banks.

Imagine a great database, split in two: purchase data and payment data
sundered. Some payments innovators want to reunify the database. Others
– especially of the crypto-variety – seem to want to disperse it,
massively replicate it so that no one entity can control it.

The empire’s coin asserted state authority but freed people to trade,
with no necessary centralized infrastructure. Yet people reinscribed
status and rank and personality into those coins, perhaps advertising
their own infrastructures for value – scales with which to weigh the
metal.

The state’s money reasserted political authority and the state’s central
banks affirmed the position of the state in monetary policy and banking.
It also facilitated free exchange, with an infrastructure for producing
and distributing cash but no central record of how that cash was being
used. In the Simmel story, this is anonymized and dehierarchized money.
Viviana Zelizer, Jane Guyer, and others, however, have shown how people
took that deracinated money and reinserted it into relations of
rank.[^12]

What is happening now? Centralized database owners vie with one another
over ownership of new and vast transactional archives that are always in
the making. Infrastructures are not just the sites of transfer of the
information in those archives, but the sites of its production and
capture. This is itself a kind of decentralization, into multiple
databases.

## New Politics

Michael Warner argued in *Letters of the Republic* that broadsides in
early colonial America at first provided a representation of a God-given
hierarchical natural order, king firmly ensconced at that top of that
order.[^13] The Revolutionaries’ were different: they were, after all,
trying to constitute a new kind of person through these letters: fellow
citizens, whom they would hail as such. By hailing the person into a
distributed horizontal community they would then constitute the
Republican polity. If new payment systems are proliferating the records
of transactionality for human beings, what kind of person and what kind
of public are thereby being constituted? What’s the nature of the
database of all human interaction and transaction? Where is it? Who
controls it?

Money can serve as an externalized memory of social transactions and
relations.[^14] What we are seeing now is a kind of and memory. One kind
of decentralization is corporate. There is decentralization from the
mass payment markets of the ACH, the card networks, and checks – with
designs on cash. There is then a corresponding recentralization into
closed corporate communities, to borrow wrongly an ethological phrase,
of the payment innovators. Another decentralization is the distributed
system represented by the Bitcoin blockchain, a massively replicated
ledger, broadly and publicly shared, with a public whose speech is
somehow concealed.

Payments today are a spaghetti of cables and wires and rails and portals
and protocols. We are now seeing new linkages among these private
infrastructures, private gateways between, say, ApplePay and American
Express, or Braintree (the payment service behind almost all ‘sharing
economy’ ventures) and PayPal. Virtually invisible, those private
gateways may become sites of political concern. They are the
recentralized, enclosed storehouses of our memories, our histories of
interrelation.

We, two wild west schoolmarms, want to prod people – the payments
innovators, the public, you, dear reader – to think anew about the
interfaces and compositions among these types of systems. Regulators do
this all the time, when they mandate interoperability between systems,
and we benefit from it, even though it flies under our radar, because we
ignore what company’s point-of-sale terminal we’re using to pay with
whatever card we wish, and we can’t even see the Independent Sales
Organization or the payment processor behind that terminal. There are
switches and interchanges mandated to allow our money to ride these
rails; there are tons of intermediaries in what seems like the simplest
card swipe or PIN entry.

If we think about infrastructures or channels as closed political
claims, payment innovation can be an unsettling of those claims, and the
opening up of possible alternatives. The alternative can be liberating.
Or, frankly, expensive or extortionist. We pay to pay every time we use
a non-cash system. How will various forms of money-memory interoperate
in a world no longer necessarily undergirded by the old narratives of
nation, state, and economy?

How will the Wild West be won – and who will win it?

## Acknowledgements

We would like to thank our partners in payments research, Taylor C.
Nelms and Scott Mainwaring, for their camaraderie and insight as we
ventured into the Wild West together. We also thank all the participants
in the MoneyLab convening in Amsterdam, in March, 2014. Maurer’s
research on payments has been supported by the U.S. National Science
Foundation, (SES 0960423). The opinions presented here are the authors
own and do not reflect those of the National Science Foundation or any
other organization.

## 

## References 

Grossman, Peter Z. *American Express: The Unofficial History of the
People Who Built the Great Financial Empire*, New York: Random House
Value Publishing, 1987.

Guyer, Jane. *Marginal Gains: Monetary Transactions in Atlantic Africa*,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.

Harper, Tom and Bernardo Batiz-Lazo. *Cash Box: The Invention and
Globalization of the ATM*, Louisville, KY: NetWorld Media Group, 2013.

Hart, Keith. *Memory Bank: Money in an Unequal World*, London: Profile,
2000.

Hudson, Michael. The Development of Money-of-Account in Sumer’s Temples,
in Michael Hudson and Cornelia Wunsch (eds) *Creating Economic Order:
Record-keeping, Standardization, and the Development of Accounting in
the Ancient Near East*, Volume IV. Bethesda, MD: CDL, 2000, pp. 303-330.

Ingham, Geoffrey, ‘“Babylonian Madness”: On the Historical and
Sociological Origins of Money’, in John Smithin (ed.) *What Is Money?*
London: Routledge, 2000, pp. 16-41.

Mauss, Marcel. *The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic
Societies*. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1954.

Simmel, Georg. *The Sociology of Georg Simmel*, trans. Kurt H. Wolff,
Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1950.

Stearns, David. *Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the VISA
Electronic Payment System*, New York: Springer, 2011.

U.S. Federal Reserve. *2013 Federal Reserve Payments Study: Recent and
Long-Term Payment Trends in the United States: 2003-2012, Summary Report
and Initial Data Release*, Washington, DC, 2013.

Warner, Michael, *The Letters of the Republic: Publication and the
Public Sphere in Eighteenth-Century America*, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Univ. Press, 1992.

Zelizer, Viviana A. *The Social Meaning of Money*, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1994.

[^1]: Marcel Mauss, *The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in
    Archaic Societies*, New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1954.

[^2]: For a journalistic history of American Express, see Peter Z.
    Grossman, *American Express: The Unofficial History of the People
    Who Built the Great Financial Empire*, New York: Random House Value
    Publishing, 1987.

[^3]: @sammaule, ‘My tweet back in Oct: In a gold rush you can mine for
    gold or sell shovels. Nice shovel @obedier @GetPoynt \#CGDigital.’
    Twitter post, 4 November 2014, 6:28 AM,
    [https://twitter.com/sammaule/status/529641370638897152](../customXml/item1.xml).

[^4]: @dgwbirch, ‘“@sammaule: My tweet back in Oct: In a gold rush you
    can mine for gold or sell shovels" or set up a bank.’ Twitter post,
    4 November 2014, 7:09
    AM, [https://twitter.com/dgwbirch/status/529651610461282304](numbering.xml).

[^5]: @Greg\_Coogan, ‘@dgwbirch @sammaule You could sell treasure maps
    too. Today we call that consulting.’ Twitter post, 4 November 2014,
    7:10 AM,
    [https://twitter.com/Greg\_Coogan/status/529651859942678529](styles.xml).

[^6]: See Michael Hudson, ‘The Development of Money-of-Account in
    Sumer’s Temples’, in Michael Hudson and Cornelia Wunsch (eds)
    *Creating Economic Order: Record-keeping, Standardization, and the
    Development of Accounting in the Ancient Near East*, Volume IV,
    Bethesda MD: CDL, 2000 pp. 303-330; and Geoffrey Ingham, ‘Babylonian
    Madness: On the Historical and Sociological Origins of Money’, in
    John Smithin (ed.) *What Is Money?* London: Routledge, 2000, pp.
    16-41.

[^7]: This is a position long held by the economic anthropologist Keith
    Hart. See his *Memory Bank: Money in an Unequal World*, London:
    Profile, 2000.

[^8]: US Federal Reserve, 2013 ‘Federal Reserve Payments Study: Recent
    and Long-Term Payment Trends in the United States: 2003-2012’,
    *Summary Report and Initial Data Release*, Washington, DC, 2013.

[^9]: See Tom Harper and Bernardo Batiz-Lazo, *Cash Box: The Invention
    and Globalization of the ATM*, Louisville, KY: NetWorld Media Group,
    2013.

[^10]: See David Stearns, *Electronic Value Exchange: Origins of the
    VISA Electronic Payment System*, New York: Springer, 2011.

[^11]: Stearns, *Electronic Value Exchange* 2011.

[^12]: Georg Simmel, *The Sociology of Georg Simme*l, trans. Kurt H.
    Wolff, Glencoe, IL: The Free Press, 1950; Jane Guyer, *Marginal
    Gains: Monetary Transactions in Atlantic Africa*, Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2004; Viviana A. Zelizer, *The Social
    Meaning of Money*, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.

[^13]: Michael Warner, *The Letters of the Republic: Publication and the
    Public Sphere in Eighteenth-Century America,* Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press, 1992.

[^14]: Hart, *Memory Bank* 2000.
