---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Money Talks: The Enclosure of Mobile Payments

### Rachel O’Dwyer {.author}

> *Much still depends on who owns and controls the networks, who sets
> the terms of entry, and who gathers and sorts […] information and for
> what ends.*[^1]

In parts of the Global South 2.5 billion people are excluded from
financial services, but many of this number have access to mobile
phones.[^2] Where transacting at a distance was often difficult,
involving long journeys and daisy-chain permutations of friends and
acquaintances to move money from A to B, informal practices emerged
involving the circulation of airtime as a kind of currency. Instead of
using pay-as-you-go phone credit in talk, the top-up code is circulated
as a text message to a recipient as a remittance, payment or gift, or
even retained as a form of savings. Airtime, traditionally a unique
commodity that represents the capacity to communicate and cooperate with
others, now also fulfills many of the functions of money. Mobile phones
are used to enable not only wireless communications, but also the
manipulation, transfer, and store of value.

For anthropologist Bill Maurer, airtime trading reveals the creative
instability of money in a digitized context. Airtime performs as a
commodity in one instance, as a communications channel in another, and
as a system of payment, means of exchange, and store of value when it is
used as an alternative currency.[^3] It continually moves between states
of communication and transaction in ways that are plural and mutable.

Airtime is a bottom-up phenomenon; before established mobile SMS payment
systems such as M-Pesa, informal practices around airtime sharing and
exchange were documented in different countries. In an anthropological
study of money in Afghanistan, Chipchase and Lee describe the role of
airtime in the development of love marriages, where ‘common dating
etiquette […] has the male suitor sending airtime credit to the woman he
likes, and if necessary, purchasing a basic phone for her’.[^4] While
this suggests a gift economy of sorts, airtime also operates as a de
facto currency. Pre-paid minutes can be exchanged for cash or spent in
shops in places such as Cote d’Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, Uganda, and
Nigeria. In Zimbabwe, where American banknotes have replaced the
hyperinflation-ravaged Zimbabwean dollar, airtime transfers sometimes
take the place of small transactions in the absence of readily available
coinage.[^5] Shopkeepers frequently give airtime instead of change in
transactions.[^6] As the system has scaled up, agents on the ground have
come to act as cash-in/cash-out points for the network, transforming
paper money into airtime and back again. Alongside these practices, the
use of airtime as a form of international remittance is also
significant, with companies such as Ezetop and Transferto conducting
airtime transfers for more than 350 operators in over 100 countries via
the web. The value of these international remittances via mobile phones
surpassed \$10 billion in 2013.[^7]

Practices like airtime trading are significant because they imagine new
kinds of money outside of state-backed currencies as well as new ways of
transacting outside of (or in the absence of) publicly mandated systems.
Like other sociotechnical experiments in money such as cryptocurrency
and cryptoequity, they also point to creative evolutions in the
substantiation of value going forward. Money is socially produced, these
practices suggest, and could be produced differently. And where access
to mobile communications is in the hands of many, such alternatives may
be easier to mobilize. We might take money and the means of creating
money into our own hands. In this early stage, however, it’s also
important that we think about how the politics of the platforms and
systems that we now transact on and possibly use to create or circulate
a ‘different kind of money’ will also shape those ambitions going
forward.

## The Infrastructural Base of Mobile Communication

The practice of airtime trading is now so ubiquitous that it has led to
anxieties about the use of phone credit as an unregulated form of money.
Network operators in such a scenario are not only provisioning
communications services, some argue, but also ‘issuing their own
currency’ and defining its exchange rate.[^8] Instead of a state-backed
currency, airtime trading transfers the control of money from banks to
network incumbents. The money in question – airtime circulated as a
currency – is guaranteed and produced by the infrastructure of mobile
communications.

When we talk of airtime, therefore, we are speaking about a commodity
and a currency that is brought into being alongside the economic
enclosure of the wireless spectrum. ‘Spectrum’ describes the
electromagnetic frequencies used for all forms of mobile and wireless
communication, from radio and television networks to cellular networks,
nearfield communications, and the mobile internet. Electromagnetic
spectrum was initially recognized as a ‘commons’: nobody was thought to
own the airwaves anymore than anybody might be thought to own the air
itself and anyone with the necessary equipment could use radio waves to
transmit messages. In the early decades of the 20th century, however,
the first radio acts declared spectrum to be a scarce resource in need
of licensing. Subsequent decades saw the deregulation of wireless and
the introduction of spectrum auctions, where frequency bands are sold at
exorbitant prices to the highest bidder. These auctions are higher-level
transactions in airtime. And while mobile operators don’t exactly trade
spectrum like cash, a spectrum license represents ‘the true currency of
wireless operators’[^9] counting for as much as 80 percent of a
company’s total net worth.[^10]

As digital computation migrates to mobile and pervasive environments,
becoming reliant on spectrum-based networks, this resource is
increasingly significant. Spectrum is currently amortized over a period
of 10 to 40 years and in accordance with a calculation known as
megahertz-pop (MHz-pop), representing the population in a license area
multiplied by bandwidth.[^11] At the heart of this value, in other
words, are the communicative, cognitive, and cooperative capacities of a
network of users, our everyday acts of attention, transaction and
sociality. It is this enclosure of the spectrum commons that facilitates
the operation of airtime as a de facto currency. This is what lends
spectrum its intrinsic value and underpins airtime as money. Airtime
trading might be a bottom-up phenomenon that re-imagines money in
situations where trust in banks and public authorities is at an all-time
low, but it also builds and transacts within other control systems and
forms of enclosure in communication networks.

The practice of airtime trading refers to the enclosure of radio space,
but also to new forms of enclosure where the political economy of
payment systems and network communications intersect. The
infrastructures for payments, traditionally a public resource or
commons[^12] are being enclosed in new and troubling ways in the mobile
space. These new systems for value-transfer inherit constraints and
affordances from the protocols and standards of the communications
‘rails’ they ride on.[^13] They encode geographies of access as well as
particular relations of production and property. How will the political
economy of mobile network infrastructure – from handsets through to core
and radio access infrastructure – shape the geography of access in the
mobile payments space and, in turn, the future of money? [^14]

## Enclosure in Digital Networks

Enclosure in digital networks amounts to rights to control access, to
exclude, and to extract benefits from communications. Network operators,
service providers, equipment manufacturers, developers, and media
conglomerates currently hold these privileges. Users do not. The term
‘enclosure’ has a double valence in this context. On one hand it refers
to the alienation of users from the means or conditions of some element
of production. As already discussed, the enclosure of spectrum makes it
illegal to set up an unlicensed radio station or GSM network and users
are forced instead through proprietary channels. On the other hand,
‘enclosure’ alludes to the active construction of a productive space in
which these tools and capacities may be redistributed to users, now
bounded in such a way as to control value and mediate production.
Andrejevic embraces this model of enclosure when he describes: ‘the
construction of privately owned and operated interactive enclosures that
serve to separate users from the means of interaction, transaction,
communication and expression’.[^15] Rights to the production and
circulation of information are appropriated and filtered through
administrative channels, at which point they are once more distributed
as part of the services corporations must deliver to users in order to
ensure their productivity. In other words, we are given access once more
to communications but this access is mediated by commercial interests
who have established themselves as ‘rentiers’ of the network.

Rent arises because social actors can realize an enhanced income stream,
over an extended period of time, by virtue of their exclusive control
over some directly or indirectly tradable item.[^16] Simply through
controlling the pipe a corporation can extract a rent from the
user.[^17] New forms of rent are increasingly generated in this digital
space, such as the rent over the attention economy performed by web
advertising, or the rent of internet service providers (ISPs) over
bandwidth, and mobile network operators over electromagnetic spectrum.
Direct forms of rent trade expressly on access to an element of
production; such as when an operator establishes a monopoly on
infrastructure, bandwidth, software or platforms. Indirect rents, in
contrast, result when actors trade, not on the resource itself, but on
the commodities and services that may be expropriated through its use,
such as from advertising revenues or through speculating on future uses.
In the case of indirect rents, the value is ‘socially produced’; it is
the sum total of users and their communicative and cooperative
acts.[^18] An example of this is revenue earned by ISPs, and platform
providers when they establish a monopoly over users, content, data, and
social networks. The rent extracted in this context is a payment in
attention, information, or affiliation, which in turn can be sold to
advertising companies and market researchers who require access to
users, their content, and their networks. Rent in this context has
become less about charging for access to a resource and more often about
leveraging the value produced when this access is (re)distributed to
users in some mediated form. Income from user-generated data and content
turns out to be a lot more profitable than a straightforward rent on the
bit-pipe alone. Why accept a straightforward fee for a resource when you
can access far greater streams of value by making everything free and
accessible?[^19]

To achieve this, enclosure in mobile networks oscillates between access
and control. Access to information services become mobile, ubiquitous,
or ‘everyware’; but this access is mediated, monitored, and controlled
by a commercial entity. Today, we participate in these enclosures in a
variety of ways: when using software applications supplied by third
parties; through cloud storage facilities; through managed device
platforms such as mobile phones, smart phones, e-readers, tablets, and
music players; through social media networks; and through online
databases and search engine queries.[^20] We are also participating in
them when we trade and transact over our mobile devices. All these
enclosures rely on proprietary resources such as storage and processing
facilities, core infrastructure, base station controllers, satellites,
radio access infrastructure, and crucially, the ‘privileged protocol’
through which transmissions are performed: electrical and optical
cables, and the electromagnetic frequencies used for wireless
transmissions.[^21]

## Money is Both a Token and a Rail

It should be clear that we need to think about the ways in which
existing systems of enclosure and value capture in networks will shape
the future of payment as money migrates to mobile. What kinds of systems
are emerging as banks and telecommunications intersect?

Speaking on ‘Closed Loops and Private Gateways: Money, Technology and
the Public Interest in Payment’ at the MoneyLab conference in Amsterdam,
Bill Maurer made an invaluable distinction between money as a ‘token’
and money as a ‘rail’, or between money as *information* and
*infrastructure*.[^22] The monetary token represents the network of
social relations that makes it possible for money to represent the value
of all other commodities. Through pricing information, the token
materializes a collective consensus about value and the social
construction of equivalence between things and their relations to other
things in exchange. In order to acquire a commodity, I hand over a
token, where price describes the units that I must present in exchange
for goods or services. This might be an official bit of paper with
instructions on it, or a coin, data in a ledger, or the public keys used
to undersign cryptographic transactions.

But money is not just untethered information; it also includes the rails
or infrastructures that support these flows. Infrastructure is what
circulates or moves money, but it is also what holds it together, in
that infrastructures also produce and guarantee money as a means of
exchange, as a unit of account, and as a store of value. These
infrastructures are multiple. Where historically this refers to the
introduction of institutions such as the Federal Reserve and the Central
Bank to guarantee currency, today we encounter conditions where our
telecommunications and network service providers are emerging as
veritable financial institutions with control over the informational
content of money but also over where and to whom that information
flows.[^23] We might say that while the ‘token’ is socially produced,
the ‘rail’ is consolidated in material, infrastructural, and juridical
limitations that continue to constrain our ability to control money or
to produce it differently.

Today network infrastructure is at the apex of monetary circulation in
both wired and wireless networks. Internet protocols are integral to
wired payments. Channels such as Short message Services (SMS),
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) messages, Near Field
Communications (NFC), Quick Response (QR) codes, and third party gateway
applications all play a role in mobile money transfer and form the rails
on which our money now rides. The role of telecommunications in money
transfer becomes even more significant when we consider that new forms
of electronic payment and currency obfuscate easy distinctions between
the informational token transferred, the data produced by the transfer,
and the architectures and infrastructures that support it. Airtime, as
previously discussed, produces a self-referential token guaranteed by
the intrinsic value of the spectrum-based ‘rails’ on which the currency
travels. So too, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin collapse the
distinction between the token as a verification process in the
blockchain and the peer-to-peer infrastructure that supports, produces,
and circulates money. On the flipside, the data artifacts of our online
activities are now not only monetizable, but are coming to act as
currencies of a sort, as the previously latent traces of our movements,
interests, and social interactions may be used to pay for services.[^24]

And yet, while roads, airports, ports, highways, spectrum, copper or
fiber-optic cables are significant to money and where it travels, it is
worth noting that there is also a strong sociality to the
infrastructures of payment. The most significant form of infrastructure
that money relies on is still social. Money rides networks of trust,
reputation, and relationality. Remittance networks often involve moving
money in an episodic fashion through a network of human peers. Informal
value transfer systems that operate in unbanked spaces, such as Hawala
networks in the Middle East and North Africa also transact through
already existing social channels that can transmit meaning and
communication, but also economic value.[^25] Formalized banking
structures continue to leverage a degree of social capital.[^26]
Telematic networks often build onto these already existing social
channels. This is explicit in examples such as airtime trading and
mobile money, where agents on the ground are theorized as ‘bridges to
cash’ or ‘human ATMs’.[^27] It is also obvious in new forms of
cryptocurrency such as Ripple and Document Coin that transact on
individual reputation and network affiliations.[^28] These rails are
never purely instrumental; they are always sociotechnical.

## Enclosure of the Payments Space 

Instead of information and communication technologies supplementing
financial operations, telecommunications operators, and particularly
those supporting wireless communications, are emerging as veritable
financial actors in their own right.[^29] This trend is particularly
obvious in the Global South, where wireless services are more easily
provisioned than both financial services and wired communications.
Telecommunications companies are now acquiring banking licenses and
traditional banks are partnering with operators or in some cases
acquiring their own radio licenses to roll out financial services over
mobile networks.

While airtime-trading initially existed as a common good (albeit one
implemented on proprietary network infrastructures), major industry
consortia such as the Global System for Mobile Communications
Association (GSMA), and the World Bank’s International Finance
Corporation (IFC) are now looking to harness these practices as a means
of financial access to the worlds ‘unbanked’ or ‘underbanked’
communities.[^30] According to the GSMA MMU Deployment Tracker, there
are currently 246 ‘mobile money’ deployments, with a further 113
planned.[^31] Among the most notable of these are Kenya’s M-Pesa, GCash
in the Philippines, and Digicel’s Tchotcho in Haiti, large scale mobile
money transfer systems that scale airtime trading, using SMS to transfer
money with agents on the ground acting as cash-in and cash-out points in
the network. M-Pesa now also offers domestic peer-to-peer transfer, bill
payment services, and other forms of bulk payment, merchant payment,
international remittances, loan disbursement, and repayment links to
other banking products. Econet Wireless in Zimbabwe is now offering
‘EcoCash loans’ to their mobile customers, microloans that are deposited
to the user’s phone. Today, with mobile money services, telcos such as
Digicel, Econet Wireless, and Safaricom are de facto banks in their
respective jurisdictions. On the other side of the equation, Equity
Bank, Kenya’s largest financial Institution, has recently applied for a
license to become a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO).[^32]

Opinion moves between a recognition of formal mobile money services as a
necessary social good that gives security, safety, independence, and
mobility to users, and a perspective that recognizes these services as
expanding financial enclosure to the world’s poorest communities and
extracting additional rents in the process.[^33] A significant market
exists for new communications infrastructures for global and domestic
remittances.[^34] Additional revenue can be made by financial
institutions and mobile network operators who insert themselves as
commercial intermediaries in the monetary exchange, mediating access to
communications and charging transaction fees. Transaction charges may
not individually represent a lot of money, but cumulatively they produce
a significant and fairly constant fee-based revenue source when they
reach scale.[^35] For an indication, Safaricom, the mobile operator that
offers M-Pesa, reported mobile money revenues of Kshs 26.56 billion for
2013-2014.[^36]

Extracting these rents requires a further enclosure of the channels that
support transactivity – in this case, radio access infrastructure and
the electromagnetic spectrum that allow for communications. It’s true
that mobile money justifies greater investment in universal service
provision, a development that may have positive social and economic
consequences for developing countries because it supports investment in
communications infrastructure and wide area network coverage. However,
the growing demand for mobile bandwidth that mobile money represents
also invites arguments for the privatization and deregulation of
infrastructural development.[^37] There is not a lot of potential to
build or scale an alternative nonproprietary infrastructure; instead,
the powerful network effects of commercial services such as those
offered by Safaricom displace alternatives and make commercial enclosure
almost impossible to resist.[^38]

Scaling a commercial remittance network also necessitates the enclosure
of the interpersonal forms of trust and sociality that support the
culture of mobile payment systems at a local level. Mobile money
*encloses* human sociality because it leverages the networks of trust
already existing between the money agents and their customers, and
workers and their families. For money to flow, users on the ground must
trust in their agents and agents in each other. This human network forms
a necessary part of the infrastructure of money transfer, and yet some
links in the system may be unrewarded or even degraded by the technical
transfer systems they help to support. When social agents become
economic agents, this is also thought to flatten and displace discrete
and localized transactivity, undermining the social capital that existed
prior to mobile remittances such as face-to-face microfinance
institutions and informal and episodic remittance networks between
friends and families.[^39] In this way, while mobile money requires
social infrastructures, it also potentially undermines the social
institutions necessary for the functioning of exchange.

Mobile money practices are also emerging in the Global North, albeit
with a different customer base and revenue model. While services in the
Global South largely depend on SMS and USSD channels for executing
transactions, smartphones provide more possibilities for payment, with
mobile network operators and third parties producing mobile wallets and
NFC or QR code based applications for e-payments on the go. Alongside
network operators, ISPs such as Google and Facebook are also entering
this space.[^40] Device manufacturers also have a hand in, with payment
solutions forming an integral part of the iPhone 6 and anticipated to
replace the magnetic strip interface of the credit card in the near
future.[^41]

Telecommunications companies in the Global North are under a lot of
pressure to justify their investment in next generation networks and
spectrum. Expanding to additional financial services such as mobile
money transfer and mobile wallets represents another possible value
chain and the opportunity for a broader customer base for the incumbent,
particularly when some of their other sources of income are now shared
with highly competitive service and content providers. Here the value
chain extends beyond transaction fees for payment infrastructure to the
value of payment information. Just as in other kinds of digital
enclosure, we can identify a shift from direct forms of rent that trade
on the infrastructure itself towards indirect forms of rent that trade
on forms of voluntary or unconscious production in online spaces.

A direct rent occurs when an operator extracts a monetary fee in return
for processing a financial transaction. As we saw with mobile money in
the Global South, rent takes the form of a transaction fee as a
percentage of the overall remittance. In the Global North, however, much
of the rent now accumulates at a different degree of exploitation. This
is not so much a toll on the pipe itself, but on the data produced by
users at the point of transaction. Such an approach responds to
diminishing returns in dumb infrastructure,[^42] but also, as Maurer
points out, to recent legislation to limit and regulate transaction
fees.[^43] Companies now propose the ‘data of payments’ as the root of a
more valuable and defensible business model independent of monetary
fees.[^44] As society goes cashless, ‘payment companies will have a
larger business, and a more valuable one, in closing the loop for
offline transactions and helping deliver customers’ to advertisers.[^45]
Through the point of purchase by way of any non-cash medium we
contribute transactional data. From a user’s perspective, it’s not that
the question of the toll or rent disappears from the equation, but that
the cost of transacting is exacted in the currency of personal data and
privacy itself, which in turn can be aggregated, exchanged, and readily
(re)monetized by commercial actors.

The effects of this enclosure are far-reaching. The most obvious is the
introduction of targeted advertising and location-based services
informed by transaction histories. Here mobile payments are doubly
commodified, first when consumers are constructed as hyper-segmented
markets and sold to advertising clients, and second when the
user-generated data of payments are extracted in order to refine and
precision future commercial messages. In virtualizing money, non-cash
payments materialize previously latent informational traces of who
transferred money to whom and in exchange for what. The managers of the
bit-pipe can monetize these traces, but there are other far-reaching
effects to the wealth of data from consumer transactions. Speaking on
the emergent effects of consumer metadata in 2014’s Transmediale
Festival, big data theorist Kate Crawford identified implications beyond
being pushed unwanted recommendations or location-based services.
Instead Crawford illustrated how monitoring purchasing information
underpins new forms of governmentality in both online and offline
spaces. The effects of such scrutiny will be unevenly distributed; for
example, individual purchase tracking of low-income families or of
individuals who have claimed bankruptcy or insolvency.[^46]

## Conclusion

The forces governing information are coming to govern value, and vice
versa. Networks are no longer a subset of political economy; the
politics and governance of networks are now central to financial
capital. Existing enclosures in mobile networks are leading to new forms
of value capture when payments migrate to digital media. At the same
time, the emergence of digital payments provides justification for an
even greater enclosure of information and communication technologies,
under the guise of necessary private investments for ‘social good’ or
requisite security and regulation for new payment channels. If we want
to produce a different kind of money we need to think not only about the
informational content of money and who produces it and how, but also
about the various gateways and chokepoints that constrain the
possibility of a money that might be held, produced and circulated in a
way that socially and economically benefits people who normally don’t
have a lot of financial security or control. Because what we have
instead are monetary forms that enclose users at every turn, first
through debt and second through the necessity of waged work and unwaged
digital work.

In the face of these widespread enclosures we need to maintain the
possibility of our communications and our exchanges with each other as a
commons, as something we all work to produce, and over which we should
have some degree of autonomy, ownership, and control. One point of focus
is that if digital and monetary enclosures are coalescing, the spaces
and sites of resistance and struggle within networks might also be
fruitful sites for radicalizing or open sourcing money in the near
future.

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank CTVR, the Telecommunications Research Centre, the
MoneyLab conference and mailing list organized by the Institute of
Network Cultures and Prof. Bill Maurer of the University of California,
Irvine for his recommendations regarding mobile money.

## References

‘Airtime is Money’, *The Economist*, 19 January 2013,
<http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21569744-use-pre-paid-mobile-phone-minutes-currency-airtime-money>.

Allaire, Jeremy. ‘Instant, Free and Secure: New Standards for Global
Consumer Finance’, *Bitfin Conference*, Dublin, 3-4 July 2014.

Andrejevic, Mark. ‘Surveillance in the Digital Enclosure’, *The
Communication Review* 10.4 (2007): 295-317.

Bátiz-Lazo, Bernardo and Douglas Wood. ‘An Historical Appraisal of
Information Technology in Commercial Banking’, *Electronic Markets* 12.3
(2002): 192-205.

Bazelon, Coleman. ‘The Economic Basis of Spectrum Value: Pairing AWS-3
with the 1755 MHz Band is More Valuable than Pairing it with Frequencies
from the 1690 MHz Band’, *The Brattle Group, Washington DC*, 2011.

Chipchase, Jan, and Panthea Lee. ‘Mobile Money: Afghanistan’,
*Innovations* 6.2 (2011): 13-33.

Crawford, Kate. ‘The Uses and Abuses of Big Data’, *Transmediale
Conference*, Berlin, 29 January - 2 February 2014.

Dawson, Jan. ‘Telecoms in 2020: A Vision of the Future’, *Emerging
Communications Conference & Awards: What's Next in Telecom, Mobile &
Internet Communications*, San Francisco, 2011.

Delano, Jon. ‘Swiping iPhone 6 May Soon Replace Credit Cards’,
*CBSLocal*, 10 September 2014,
<http://pittsburgh.cbslocal.com/2014/09/10/swiping-iphone-6-may-soon-replace-credit-cards-cash/>.

Dippelsman, Robert J., and Nils Ø. Mæhle. ‘Treatment of Mobile Phone
Licenses in the National Accounts’, *Review of Income and Wealth* 49.3
(2003): 373-393.

Donovan, Kevin. ‘Mobile Money for Financial Inclusion’, *Information and
Communications for Development* 61 (2012): 61-73.

Donovan, Kevin P. ‘Mobile Money, More Freedom? The Impact of M-Pesa’s
Network Power on Development as Freedom’, *International Journal of
Communication* 6 (2012): 2647-2669.

‘Facebook seeks Irish Approval for New Money Service’ *Irish Times*, 14
April 2014,
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/technology/facebook-seeks-irish-approval-new-for-e-money-service-1.1760908>.

Finley, Klint. ‘Document Coin: A New Currency whose Value is Based on
your Reputation’, *Wired Magazine* 18 July 2014,
<http://www.wired.com/2014/07/document-coin/>.

Galloway, Alexander R. *Protocol: How Control Exists after
Decentralization*, London: MIT Press, 2004.

Greenfield, Adam. *Everyware: The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous Computing*.
New York: New Riders, 2010.

Harvey, David. ‘Labor, Capital, and Class Struggle around the Built
Environment in Advanced Capitalist Societies’, *Politics & Society* 6.3
(1976): 265-295.

Harvey, David. ‘The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
Commodification of Culture’, *Socialist Register* 38.38 (2009).

Hughes, Nick, and Susie Lonie. ‘M-Pesa: Mobile Money for the “Unbanked”
Turning Cellphones into 24-hour Tellers in Kenya’, *Innovations* 2.1-2
(2007): 63-81.

International Finance Corporation (IFC). ‘Mobile Money Study 2011’,

International Telecommunications Union (ITU). *Exploring the Value and
Economic Valuation of Spectrum*. ITU (2012),
[http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/broadband/ITU-BB-Reports\_SpectrumV
alue.pdf](http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/broadband/ITU-BB-Reports_SpectrumV%20alue.pdf).

‘In the Shadow of Mobile Money: International Airtime Remittances’,
*Mondato*, 28 May 2014, <http://mondato.com/blog/airtime/>.

Jaeger, Paul T., Jimmy Lin, Justin M. Grimes, and Shannon N. Simmons.
‘Where is the Cloud? Geography, Economics, Environment, and Jurisdiction
in Cloud Computing’, *First Monday* 14.5 (2009).

Katakam, Arunjay. ‘Annual Reports Show Mobile Money Remains a Strategic
Priority for MNO Groups’, *GSMA,* 19 June 2014,
[http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/annual-reports-show-mobile-
money-remains-a-strategic-priority-for-mno-groups](http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/annual-reports-show-mobile-%09money-remains-a-strategic-priority-for-mno-groups).

Kavesh, Robert A., Kenneth D. Garbade, and William L. Silber.
‘Technology, Communication and the Performance of Financial Markets:
1840–1975’, *The Journal of Finance* 33.3 (1978): 819-832.

Kendall, Jake, Bill Maurer, Phillip Machoka, and Clara Veniard. ‘An
Emerging Platform: From Money Transfer System to Mobile Money
Ecosystem’, *Innovations: Technology, Gover- nance, Globalization* 6.4
(2011): 49-65.

Mas, Ignacio, and Olga Morawczynski. ‘Designing Mobile Money Services:
Lessons from M-Pesa’, *Innovations* 4.2 (2009): 77-91.

Mas, Ignacio, and Dan Radcliffe. ‘Mobile Payments Go Viral: M-Pesa in
Kenya’, in Punam Chuhan-Pole and Manka Angwafo (eds) *Yes, Africa Can:
Success Stories from a Dynamic Continent*, Washington: World Bank
Publications, 2011.

Maurer, Bill. ‘Mobile Money: Communication, Consumption and Change in
the Payments Space’, *Journal of Development Studies* 48.5 (2012):
589-604.

Maurer, Bill. ‘Late to the Party: Debt and Data’, *Social Anthropology*
20.4 (2012): 474-481.

Maurer, Bill. ‘Regulation as Retrospective Ethnography: Mobile Money and
the Arts of Cash’ *Banking and Finance Law Review* 27.2 (2012): 299-313.

Maurer, Bill. ‘Closed Loops and Private Gateways: Money, Technology and
the Private Interest in Payment’, *Moneylab Conference*, Amsterdam,
21-22 March 2014, <http://vimeo.com/90207123>.

Maurer, Bill, Taylor C. Nelms, and Stephen C. Rea. ‘Bridges to Cash:
Channeling Agency in Mobile Money’, *Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute* 19.1 (2013): 52-74.

‘MMU Deployment Tracker’,
[http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mobile-money-for-
the-unbanked/insights/tracker](http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mobile-money-for-%09the-unbanked/insights/tracker).

Mumo, Muthoki. ‘Equity Bank Seeks Share of Telco Business’, *Mobile
Nation*, 25 February 2014,

Nyakazeya, Paul and Bernard Mpofu. ‘Econet Phone Tokens Used as Change’,
*The Independent*, 27 May 2010,
<http://www.theindependent.co.zw/2010/05/27/econet-phone-tokens-used-as-change/>.

O’Dwyer, Rachel. ‘Spectre of the Commons: Spectrum Regulation in the
Communism of Capital’, *Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization*
13.3 (2013): 497-526.

O’Dwyer, Rachel, and Linda Doyle. ‘This is not a Bit-pipe: A Political
Economy of the Substrate Network’, *The Fibreculture Journal* 20 (2012):
10-32.

Rampell, Alex. ‘Payment Data is More Valuable than Payment Fees’, *Tech
Crunch,* 10 August 2012,
[http://techcrunch.com/2012/08/18/payment-data-is-more-
valuable-than-payment-fees/](http://techcrunch.com/2012/08/18/payment-data-is-more-valuable-than-payment-fees/).

Remittances to Developing Countries to Stay Robust this Year, Despite
Increased Deportations of Migrant Workers, says WB, *World Bank* 11
April 2014,

Rosingh, Wouter, Adam Seal, and David Osborn. ‘Why Banks and Telecoms
Must Merge to Surge’, *Strategy + Business* 23 (2001),
<http://www.strategy-business.com/article/17163?gko=4cda6>.

Seybold, A. M. ‘Seybold’s take: Spectrum is the True Currency of
Wireless Operators’, *Fierce Wireless*, 22 June 2012,
<http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/seybolds-take-spectrum-true-currency-wireless-operators/2012-06-22>.

Star, Susan Leigh. ‘The Ethnography of Infrastructure’ *American
Behavioral Scientist* 43.3 (1999): 377-391.

System of National Accounts (SNA). *System of National Accounts 2008*,
New York, <http://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf>.

Taylor, Erin. ‘Mobile Money and the “Social Good” of Global
Finacialization’, *Moneylab Conference*, Amsterdam, 21-22 March 2014,
<http://vimeo.com/90208804>

Zax, David. ‘Is Personal Data the New Currency?’ *MIT Technology Review*
30 November 2011
<http://www.technologyreview.com/view/426235/is-personal-data-the-new-currency/>.

[^1]: Mark Andrejevic, ‘Surveillance in the Digital Enclosure’, *The
    Communication Review* 10.4 (2007): 300.

[^2]: Jeremy Allaire, ‘Instant, Free and Secure: New Standards for
    Global Consumer Finance’, Bitfin Conference, Dublin 3-4 July, 2014.

[^3]: Bill Maurer, ‘Mobile Money: Communication, Consumption and Change
    in the Payments Space’, *Journal of Development Studies* 48.5
    (2012).

[^4]: Jan Chipchase and Panthea Lee, ‘Mobile Money: Afghanistan’,
    *Innovations* 6.2 (2011): 27.

[^5]: See [https://www.econet.co.zw/services/airtime-transfer](https://www.econet.co.zw/services/airtime-transfer).

[^6]: Paul Nyakazeya and Bernard Mpofu, ‘Econet Phone Tokens Used as
    Change, *The Independent,* 27 May 2010,
    [http://www.theindependent.co.zw/2010/05/27/econet-phone-tokens-used-as-change/](http://www.theindependent.co.zw/2010/05/27/econet-phone-tokens-used-as-change/).

[^7]: ‘In the Shadow of Mobile Money: International Airtime
    Remittances’, *Mondato*, 28 May 2014,
    [http://mondato.com/blog/airtime/](http://mondato.com/blog/airtime/).

[^8]: ‘Airtime is Money’, *The Economist*, 19 January 2013,
    [http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21569744-use-pre-paid-mobile-phone-minutes-currency-airtime-money](http://www.economist.com/news/finance-and-economics/21569744-use-pre-paid-mobile-phone-minutes-currency-airtime-money).

[^9]: A.M. Seybold, ‘Seybold’s Take: Spectrum is the True Currency of
    Wireless Operators’, *Fierce Wireless*, 22 June 2012,
    [http://www.fiercewireless.com/story/seybolds-take-spectrum-true-currency-wireless-
    operators/2012-06-22](webSettings.xml).

[^10]: Robert J. Dippelsman and Nils Ø. Mæhle, ‘Treatment of Mobile
    Phone Licenses in the National Accounts’, *Review of Income and
    Wealth* 49.3 (2003): 373-393.

[^11]: Coleman Bazelon, ‘The Economic Basis of Spectrum Value: Pairing
    AWS-3 with the 1755 MHz Band is More Valuable than Pairing it with
    Frequencies from the 1690 MHz Band’, *The Brattle Group*, Washington
    DC: International Telecommunications Union (ITU); *Exploring the
    Value and Economic Valuation of Spectrum*, ITU, 2012,
    [http://www.itu.int/ITU- D/treg/broadband/ITU-BB-Reports\_SpectrumV
    alue.pdf](footnotes.xml).

[^12]: Bill Maurer speaks about payment as the last commons in
    ‘Regulation as Retrospective Ethnography: Mobile Money and the Arts
    of Cash’, *Banking and Finance Law Review* 27.2 (2012): 307.

[^13]: Ignacio Mas and Dan Radcliffe, ‘Mobile Payments Go Viral: M-PESA
    in Kenya’, in P. Chuhan-Pole and M. Angwafo (eds) *Yes, Africa Can:
    Success Stories from a Dynamic Continent*, World Bank Publications,
    2011.

[^14]: As Star reminds us, ‘optical fibers run along railway lines; new
    systems are designed for backward compatibility; and failing to
    account for these constraints may be fatal’. Susan Leigh Star, ‘The
    Ethnography of Infrastructure’, *American Behavioral Scientist* 43.3
    (1999): 382.

[^15]: Andrejevic, ‘Surveillance in the Digital Enclosure’, 2007, p.
    304.

[^16]: David Harvey, ‘Labor, Capital, and Class Struggle Around the
    Built Environment in Advanced Capitalist Societies’, *Politics &
    Society* 6.3 (1976).

[^17]: Rent is the income that can be extracted from exclusive ownership
    of a resource, where value is contingent on its availability with
    respect to demand. It constitutes a credit title or control of some
    immaterial or material asset that grants the right to draw benefit
    from a position that operates outside of production. It is unearned
    income.

[^18]: Robert J. Dippelsman and Nils Ø. Mæhle, ‘Treatment of Mobile
    Phone Licenses in the National Accounts’ *Review of Income and
    Wealth* 49.3 (2003); System of National Accounts (SNA), *System of
    National Accounts 2008,* New York,
    [http://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf](http://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf).

[^19]: I’ve written in more detail about this phenomenon elsewhere. See
    Rachel O’Dwyer and Linda Doyle, ‘This is not a Bit-pipe: A Political
    Economy of the Substrate Network’, *The Fibreculture Journal* 20
    (2012): 10-32.

[^20]: Paul Jaeger, Jimmy Lin, Justin M. Grimes, and Shannon N. Simmons,
    ‘Where is the Cloud? Geography, Economics, Environment, and
    Jurisdiction in Cloud Computing’, *First Monday* 14.5 (2009),

[^21]: Alexander R. Galloway, *Protocol: How Control Exists After
    Decentralization*, London: MIT Press, 2004, p. 11.

[^22]: Bill Maurer, ‘Closed Loops and Private Gateways: Money,
    Technology and the Private Interest in Payment’, MoneyLab
    Conference, Amsterdam, March 21-22 2014,

[^23]: Historically there are lots of different telematic
    infrastructures involved in circulating money and price information
    in the past 150 years. Kavesh, Garbade and Silber identify the role
    of the telegraph in reducing stock market price differentials
    between New York and geographically dispersed regional markets in
    the 1860s. On a global scale, the construction of transatlantic
    cables was crucial to the development of securities trading between
    major global cities such as New York and London. The postal service
    has played a role in money transfer since the 1880s, with the
    Austrian Postal Giro implementing an alternative retail transfer
    system utilizing this existing distribution channel in 1883. So too,
    the American Express Company (AmEx), now a financial services
    corporation, started as an express mail service that rivaled
    publicly mandated systems for control of money orders. Telephone
    exchanges and telegraph systems have also formed an infrastructural
    base for transactivity since the 1870s when Western Union,
    originally a telegraph company, introduced its first wired money
    transfer service. This relied on a million miles of telegraph lines
    and two international undersea cables. Similarly, telephone
    exchanges were in use between banks and customers as early as the
    1890s. Transactivity over computer networks began with the
    development of National Giro Centre in 1968, designed at the time to
    compete with the post office as a form of remittance. From the
    mid-1960s onwards, we see the emergence of widespread telematic
    infrastructures for transactivity, and with this, a gradual blurring
    of the demarcation between banks and non-financial communications
    intermediaries.

[^24]: David Zax, ‘Is Personal Data the New Currency? *MIT Technology
    Review*, 30 November 2011,

[^25]: International Finance Corporation (IFC), ‘Mobile Money Study
    2011’,

[^26]: Describing a pre-computational banking period from 1864-1945,
    Batis-Lazo and Wood demonstrated the necessity of trust
    relationships between customers and banks in this period, with bank
    managers occupying a position of reputation and standing in their
    communities: Bernard Bátiz-Lazo and Douglas Wood, ‘An Historical
    Appraisal of Information Technology in Commercial Banking’,
    *Electronic Markets* 12.3 (2002).

[^27]: Bill Maurer, Taylor C. Nelms, and Stephen C. Rea, ‘Bridges to
    Cash: Channeling Agency in Mobile Money’, *Journal of the Royal
    Anthropological Institute* 19.1 (2013).

    or Klint Finley, ‘Document Coin: A New Currency whose Value is Based
    on your Reputation’, *Wired Magazine*, 18 July 2014,

[^29]: Wouter Rosingh, Adam Seal, and David Osborn, ‘Why Banks and
    Telecoms must Merge to Surge’, *Strategy + Business* 23 (2001),


[^31]: MMU Deployment Tracker,

[^32]: Muthoki Mumo, ‘Equity Bank Seeks Share of Telco Business’,
    *Mobile Nation*, 25 February 2014,

[^33]: See Kevin Donovan, ‘Mobile Money, More Freedom? The Impact of
    M-PESA’s Network Power on Development as Freedom’, *International
    Journal of Communication* 6 (2012); Erin Taylor, ‘Mobile Money and
    the ‘Social Good’ of Global Financialization’, MoneyLab Conference,
    Amsterdam, March 21-22 2014,

[^34]: International remittances currently amount to 581 billion a year.
    According to the WB, remittances to developing countries are to stay
    robust this year, despite increased deportations of migrant workers,
    *World Bank*, 11 April 2014,

[^35]: Kevin Donovan, ‘Mobile Money for Financial Inclusion’,
    *Information and Communications for Development* 61 (2012); Bill
    Maurer, ‘Mobile Money: Communication, Consumption and Change in the
    Payments Space’, *Journal of Development Studies* 48.5 (2012); Jake
    Kendall, Bill Maurer, Phillip Machoka, and Clara Veniard, ‘An
    Emerging Platform: From Money Transfer System to Mobile Money
    Ecosystem’, *Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization* 6.4
    (2011): 49-65.

[^36]: Arunjay Katakam, ‘Annual Reports Show Mobile Money Remains a
    Strategic Priority for MNO Groups’, *GSMA,* 19 June 2014,

[^37]: Bill Maurer, Taylor C. Nelms, and Stephen C. Rea, ‘Bridges to
    Cash: Channeling Agency in Mobile Money’, *Journal of the Royal
    Anthropological Institute* 19.1 (2013); Bill Maurer, ‘Regulation as
    Retrospective Ethnography: Mobile Money and the Arts of Cash’,
    *Banking and Finance Law Review* 27.2 (2012).

[^38]: Kevin P. Donovan, ‘Mobile Money, More Freedom? The Impact of
    M-PESA’s Network Power on Development as Freedom’, *International
    Journal of Communication* 6 (2012).

[^39]: Nick Hughes and Susie Lonie, ‘M-PESA: Mobile Money for the
    “Unbanked” Turning Cellphones into 24-hour Tellers in Kenya’,
    *Innovations* 2.1-2 (2007); Ignacio Mas and Olga Morawczynski,
    ‘Designing Mobile Money Services: Lessons from M-PESA’,
    *Innovations* 4.2 (2009).

[^40]: ‘Facebook seeks Irish Approval for New Money Service’, *Irish
    Times*, 14 April 2014,

[^41]: Jon Delano, ‘Swiping iPhone 6 May Soon Replace Credit Cards’,
    *CBSLocal*, 10 September 2014,

[^42]: As telecommunications economist Jan Dawson explains, traditional
    telecommunications providers can no longer afford to provision
    mobile network infrastructure through a pay-per-use model alone
    because of a law of diminishing returns; instead it is necessary
    that they adopt a business model that not only supports social
    production through mobile networks, but also leverages the value of
    user-generated content to expand their revenue. ‘Telecoms in 2020: A
    Vision of the Future’, *Emerging Communications Conference & Awards:
    What's Next in Telecom, Mobile & Internet Communications*, San
    Francisco, 2011.

[^43]: Bill Maurer writes about the impact of the 2011 Durbin Amendment
    in ‘Late to the Party: Debt and Data’, *Social Anthropology* 20.4
    (2012): 474.

[^44]: Alex Rampell, ‘Payment Data is More Valuable than Payment Fees’,
    *Tech Crunch,* 10 August 2012.

[^45]: Rampell, ‘Payment Data’.

[^46]: Kate Crawford, ‘The Uses and Abuses of Big Data’, *Transmediale
    Conference,* Berlin, 29 January - 2 February, 2014.
