---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Mobile Money: Financial Globalization, Alternative, or Both?

# Erin B. Taylor

Mobile money, and indeed microfinance generally, seems to generate
strong opinions. After giving a presentation about mobile money in Haiti
at the MoneyLab conference in March 2014, an audience member asked me a
loaded question that stopped me in my tracks. ‘But according to what
I’ve read, mobile money has pretty much failed everywhere,’ he said, ‘Do
you think that’s true for Haiti?’

My mind flashed back to a thousand memories from my fieldwork in Haiti:
women receiving conditional cash payments from Mercy Corps via Voilá’s
mobile money service; T-Cash, in Saint Marc; vendors paying the rent on
their market stalls in Port-au-Prince via Digicel’s TchoTcho Mobil; my
friend and assistant Emmanuel, who lives on the Dominican side of the
border with Haiti, receiving money from his cousin to pay her Sky
television bill; many others who use their mobile money accounts as a
safe place to store cash.

How do you judge the success of mobile money? Success according to whom?
In a conference about financial alternatives, ‘success’ is a slippery
subject. It might mean rapid uptake, giving millions of users access to
formal financial tools for the first time. But it could also mean the
exact opposite: mobile money is a way of incorporating people into the
formal global financial system, and many people at this conference were
present to discuss ways of opting out of this very system.

For the users described above, the question of whether mobile money is
useful is far more relevant than whether mobile money is successful.
Like mobile phones, and unlike many other financial services in Haiti,
mobile money is available and affordable. Haitians use mobile money on a
daily basis, along with a range of other formal and informal services,
to solve a range of concrete problems that were previously more
difficult, time consuming, and expensive using informal or overpriced
services. They don’t tend to worry too much about whether using mobile
money will improve their economic condition or contemplate the
implications of joining the world of formal finance. Given that the
majority of the financial services they use are informal, and therefore
alternative by definition, they don't have the luxury of being able to
dream of ways to opt out of using fiat money, such as by buying and
spending bitcoins.

However, in considering this question from the conference audience, I
was acutely aware that users aren’t the only people to whom mobile money
is useful. In fact, during my time in Haiti I repeatedly got the
impression that the usefulness of mobile money to citizens was far
outweighed by its usefulness to development organizations, companies,
and government. While much of the hype around mobile money is generated
around the potential of mobile money to facilitate financial inclusion
for 2.5 billion ‘unbanked’ people, the people creating the hype are
generally not those end users. In fact, while mobile money deployments
are growing at a rapid rate, and its user base steadily increasing, it
has seen nothing like the viral uptake that many hoped and predicted.
Why not, and what does this say about who mobile money is for, what it
does, and how we might judge its success?

## A Brief History of Microcredit

Since Grameen Bank launched the microcredit movement in 1982, the quest
for financial inclusion of the world’s poorest people has gained
currency. Despite a few scandals, such as the oversupply of credit in
places such as Andrah Pradesh, coalitions of development agencies,
philanthropic organizations, and companies have continued to funnel
money into microfinance, essentially banking upon microfinance as a
powerful tool for socioeconomic development as well as a means for
companies to make a profit. Mobile money, while not technically
microfinance, has joined the ranks of financial ‘products for the poor’
aimed at increasing financial inclusion.

Small-scale financial products might seem to be merely the newest trend
in poverty alleviation, but it actually has a far longer history than
the standard microcredit story reveals. According to David Roodman,[^1]
one of the earliest recorded examples of people engaging in charitable
lending is Jonathan Swift, author of *Gulliver’s Travels*. In the 1720s,
Swift would lend Dubliners five or ten pounds without interest, so long
as they could find two co-signers to guarantee the loan. Over the next
couple of decades, charitable loan associations began appearing in
Dublin and spread slowly throughout Europe.

The inclusive finance movement that has emerged over the past few
decades resembles these early organizations in its aims and practices.
However, there is one major difference. Finance today is far more
globally integrated than it was in the 17th century. When a person signs
up for a loan, a bank account, or a mobile money service, they are
joining a vast, interwoven financial system. Unlike non-fiat currencies
such as Bitcoin, which aim to provide an alternative to the world
monetary system, inclusive finance has no such goal.

Mobile money does provide alternatives, but of a different kind. Rather
than allowing users to opt out of formal systems, mobile money offers an
alternative to informal financial services, which can be slow,
inefficient, and expensive; and to formal financial services such as
remittances, which often charge prices that the world’s poorest people
cannot afford. From a microeconomic perspective, mobile money offers
significant benefits to individuals, households, and small to medium
enterprises (SMEs). They can make life far easier for individual users,
saving time and money, such as by allowing people to make instant
transactions via their mobile phones rather than traveling large
distances at great cost to deliver money. Mobile money transactions can
build businesses and save lives by speeding up the flow of cash and
improving its management. It can prevent robbery, as it is more
difficult to steal money that is stored electronically than in cash
form. It can also prevent the loss or damage of money through poor
storage conditions. Moreover, mobile money represents an increase in
consumer choice. The pricing and characteristics of mobile money
products are normally sufficiently different from other financial
products that they truly offer customers something new. And mobile money
is often far more affordable than similar products.

Both Bitcoin and mobile money aim to place greater power and choice in
the hands of their users, but through completely different means. Mobile
money is built upon the assumption that the global financial system is
better placed to offer alternatives and choice than a decentralized
system. How can we assess the contribution of mobile money to the
welfare of its users?

## 

## Mobile Money as Finance

In M-Pesa’s ‘Send Money Home’ advertisement,[^2] a city worker glances
fondly at a photograph on his desk. He picks up his phone and chooses
the ‘send money’ option. As if by magic, bills fly from his phone and
through the air. The camera cuts to a scene of a rural field, where an
elderly couple are working in their garden. The woman gets out her
phone, and money descends from the sky. She shows her new balance to her
husband and heads to an M-Pesa agent to extract cash.

While a fiction invented by Safaricom, this advertisement is indicative
of mobile money’s global image. It is widely seen as a product for
individuals in developing countries who have limited access to formal
financial tools, yet who have a need for cheaper, more reliable
services, especially remittances. And, indeed, mobile money has reached
millions of users of this kind. But remittances are not all there is to
mobile money, nor are individuals in developing countries the only kinds
of users. While mobile money provides a convenient and effective means
of distributing microfinance products, it is far broader, and more
global, than its image suggests.

First, the products offered by many mobile money providers could be
considered to be ordinary finance, rather than microfinance. In Kenya
and other countries, mobile money products have extended beyond simple
remittances and savings to include interest-bearing accounts, insurance,
and loans. These typically involve small amounts of money and are
available to people with low incomes, which is why they sometimes
attract the label ‘microfinance’. And yet, what is the aim of
microfinance programs if not to incorporate its customers into the
mainstream economy and financial system? Recipients of microfinance
loans, for example, are encouraged to ‘graduate’ to bank accounts, debit
and credit cards, and larger loans.[^3] Furthermore, the term
‘microfinance’ itself is misleading, conjuring images of small programs
in small communities. In actuality, microfinance is big business.

Second, mobile money articulates with movements in money across
international borders. Over the past few decades, remittances have come
to be an increasingly significant proportion of global cash flows.
Worldwide, it is estimated that around \$414 billion was sent in
2013,[^4] with a typical individual remittance totalling
\$100-\$300.[^5] Until recently, mobile money services were generally
confined within national borders due to technical and regulatory
restrictions, but they are increasingly being used for international
transfers. Since 2011, a partnership between Safaricom and Western Union
permits international transfers from 43 countries to M-Pesa
accounts.[^6] Safaricom plans to launch a cross-border service between
M-Pesa customers in 2015, pending regulatory approval. In 2014, Orange
launched a transfer service allowing its customers to send money between
Mali, Senegal, and Cote d’Ivoire, and in 2014, Tigo enabled a
wallet-to-wallet service between Rwanda and Tanzania.[^7] Furthermore,
researchers have long noted that remittances are often send to a
representative family member, who then redistributes the money among
family members domestically. Mobile money provides a faster, more
reliable mechanism for this redistribution. Given the size of the global
remittance market, and the rapid proliferation of mobile money services
globally, it appears highly likely that we have not seen the last of
cross-border mobile money services.

Third, mobile money's customer base is far broader than M-Pesa’s
advertisement suggests. Unlike with microfinance programs, mobile money
services do not uniquely target poor users. While mobile money services
are particularly amenable to people who have low incomes and no bank
accounts, they are available to everyone. In fact, there is some
evidence that early adopters in Kenya and Tanzania were generally people
who already had bank accounts.[^8] In Haiti, InterMedia found that early
adopters tended to be relatively affluent.[^9] As time goes on, ratios
can shift. Suri and Jack found that, outside Nairobi ‘the share of the
unbanked who used M-Pesa rose from about 21 percent in 2008 to 75
percent in 2011’.[^10] Nevertheless, people who are relatively affluent
continue to make up a significant portion of mobile money users.

Furthermore, it is incorrect to assume that all mobile money customers
are individuals. Businesses, NGOs, and government bodies use mobile
money to make and receive payments. In fact, organizations using mobile
money to make mass transactions are crucial for mobile money services to
make traction in the early days of deployments. In Afghanistan, USAID
worked with the government to implement the payment of police salaries
via mobile money.[^11] Globally, USAID has encouraged NGOs to
incorporate mobile money components into their programs.[^12] There is
also a push to develop merchant payments, as has been done with
branchless banking in Brazil, to encourage wider use of mobile
money.[^13] Indeed, the success of mobile money depends upon its
integration, not just laterally among individuals in a society, but
along economic value chains.[^14] Mobile money depends upon many small
transactions in order to be profitable, and for this, it must achieve
scale at least at the national level, and preferably internationally.

Finally, mobile money providers are generally large banks and
telecommunications companies. They are often multinational. For example,
Safaricom is 40 percent owned by Vodafone, and since M-Pesa was launched
in Kenya in 2007 it has expanded to Tanzania, Afghanistan, South Africa,
India, and Eastern Europe. Telecommunications heavyweight Digicel
operate in 31 markets throughout the Caribbean, Oceania and Central
America, and operate mobile money services in Haiti, Fiji, Samoa,
Vanuatu, and Tonga.

All these factors belie mobile money’s image as a ‘product for the
poor’. Rural peasants certainly use, and benefit from, mobile money
services, but in order to assess the global phenomenon of mobile money
we need to be aware that a diverse array of stakeholders are driving its
supply and demand.

## The Demand for Mobile Money in Haiti

If there was ever a country that appears to need new financial tools,
then Haiti is it. Banking infrastructure is scarce, and approximately 66
percent of bank branches are located in Port-au-Prince.[^15] Accessing
bank branches can be difficult, and using them can be time consuming.
Besides being badly distributed, bank branches are inefficient. Lines
are long, with people often waiting hours to make a transaction.[^16]
Microcredit institutions such as Fonkoze cover a larger portion of the
country, and formal remittance services such as Western Union and Caribe
Express are also better distributed. But remittance services such as
Western Union can be very expensive to use, especially when people wish
to spend small amounts of cash.

This leaves a gap in the market for transfers and merchant payments that
have generally been filled by informal services. Mobile money is an
attempt to bridge this gap. It is a way for people without bank accounts
or internet to access basic banking facilities through their mobile
phone. They can deposit money, store it on their SIM cards, pay for
airtime, and transfer money to other people. Unlike its banking system,
Haiti’s mobile telecommunications infrastructure is well developed, and
mobile penetration is growing rapidly. Mobile money enables a wide
distribution of service points, flexibility in how it is used by
customers, and operates with pre-existing technology. This means that
the service has the capacity to expand far more rapidly than banks,
which depend upon cumbersome infrastructure.

In the six months leading up to the launch of mobile money in Haiti, our
team conducted research in three sites to get a sense of the need and
desire for mobile money among individual Haitians. Generally speaking we
found that people were enthusiastic about the idea of using their phones
to make transactions. Our interviewees particularly cited the time and
cost of sending money and security issues concerning carrying money as
reasons why mobile money might be preferable. In Haiti it is a common
and low-cost way to send money around the country via public transport.
They either travel themselves, send the money to a friend or relative
who is traveling, or entrust the cash to a truck driver or boat captain.
In one remittance route that we identified in the south of Haiti, boats
travel along this route twice a week on market days, carrying goods,
passengers, and money from the Dominican border to the town of Marigot.
The boat journey takes around seven hours. Security is also an issue, as
people carrying cash run the risk of being robbed.

In November 2010, two telecommunications providers launched mobile
money: Digicel with TchoTcho Mobil and Voilá with T-Cash. We returned to
the field to observe how Haitians were adopting the new service. After
mobile money was launched, thousands of Haitians registered, responding
to Digicel’s and Voilá’s advertising. Interestingly, Digicel’s first
television advertisement was similar to Kenya’s, but a follow-up focused
on issues of security. It showed an elderly woman extracting money from
hiding places around her house and depositing it in her mobile money to
keep it safe from her thieving nephew. By the end of 2011, over 800,000
Haitians had signed up for mobile money services; of these, between
6,000-9,000 were in development programs at any given time.[^17] While
these numbers represent significant progress, they were lower than
expected. Maarten Boute, the former CEO of Digicel Haiti, commented ‘our
main lesson learned is how difficult it is to educate customers. When we
launched the service we assumed it would be something like selling a
mobile phone, where you stick a mobile phone into someone’s hand and
almost anyone can start using it quite quickly because it’s very easy to
understand. With a mobile banking service or a mobile money service it’s
not quite that easy.’[^18] Hence demand for mobile money may be tempered
by unfamiliarity with the technology. In the following section I discuss
how barriers to uptake affect mobile money’s supply.

## The Supply of Mobile Money in Haiti

Mobile money is ostensibly a market-driven product that is developed and
offered by private companies whose goal is to turn a profit. Often these
are telecommunications companies that partner with banks. In Kenya,
Safaricom has been very successful in scaling mobile money, and in the
past year or so has launched an array of products that work on the
mobile money platform, including insurance.[^19] However, mobile money
exhibits various factors that mean that a purely market-based solution
is not always viable. As Maarten Boute described for Haiti, customers
may be reluctant to adopt new technology and new ways of using money.
Moreover, mobile money globally is plagued by a ‘scaling’ problem
whereby people will not sign up for mobile money if there are not enough
agents in convenient locations, and businesses will not sign up to be
agents unless they feel that they have a strong customer base.[^20]
Hence, while mobile money is a commercial service, non-profit players
have been central to its development and uptake. In fact, one could
argue that without non-profit interest, mobile money may not have come
to exist in Haiti at all.

On 10 June, 2010, six months after the earthquake that levelled
Port-au-Prince and its surrounding areas, the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and the USAID-funded Haiti Integrated Finance for Value
Chains and Enterprises (HIFIVE) announced the launch of the Haiti Mobile
Money Initiative (HMMI) to stimulate the development of mobile banking
services in Haiti.[^21] The HMMI offered \$10 million in prizes and \$5
million in technical assistance for companies to develop and expand
mobile banking services across the country. In October 2010, D,
pocketing \$2.5 million. In August 2011, Voilá won the Second to Market
Prize of \$1.5 million.[^22] Voilá were bought out by Digicel in 2012,
but mobile money survived. At the time of writing, TchoTcho Digicel
claims to have 420 active agents distributed around Haiti.[^23] USAID
continue to drive demand by requiring NGOs in Haiti to include a mobile
money component into their socioeconomic development programs, fostering
links between market and welfare.

It is not difficult to see why companies might welcome NGO involvement
in mobile money. For a mobile network operator (MNO) that introduces a
mobile money service, the cost of educating customers about the new
service would likely be prohibitive. But when an organization such as
Mercy Corps or the Haitian government pays people through mobile money,
the MNO does not have to wear the costs. Furthermore, people are
incentivized to use mobile money. In the first few months, however,
there were no mobile money agents outside of Port-au-Prince, and so most
active users were connected to NGO programs. Most had been required to
register for mobile money in order to receive aid, often receiving a
free phone or SIM card in the process. From its launched in late 2010,
Mercy Corps and World Vision used mobile money to deliver conditional
cash grants and cash-for-work payments.[^24] A range of other
organizations have since started developing mobile money, including
UNDP, CARE and the World Food Program.[^25] Government-to-person (G2P)
payments are also taking place. In 2012, the Haitian government launched
a program called Ti Manma Cheri to pay grants to mothers for keeping
their children in school.[^26]

Mobile money thereby blurs the line between commerce and development.
Indeed, this is reflective of a trend over the last two decades towards
multilateral partnerships such as USAID’s Global Development Alliance
(launched in 2001). These partnerships move away from a post-World War
II development model focusing on direct aid to states or purely
non-profit community projects, instead promoting cooperation between
government, NGOs, and capital investment. The rationale behind this
shift rests upon the belief that businesses can often serve poor people
better than non-profits because they are more efficient and have more
incentive to innovate.

This idea has particularly taken hold in the global south, where
governments and scholars express frustration with the slow progress made
in raising the living standards of the world’s poorest people, despite
the influx of billions of dollars in development aid. Influential works
such as C.K. Prahalad’s *The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid*
(2009),[^27] Benioff and Southwick’s *Compassionate Capitalism*
(2004),[^28] and Hammond’s *The Next Four Billion* (2007)[^29] make a
business case for the ways in which corporations can profit to the
benefit of the world’s poorest people. In these accounts, providing
products of the poor attacks the bases of poverty by including people in
the market who were previously ignored in marketing strategies. The
shift from a USA-ROW (Rest of the World) dichotomy to the inclusion of
the emerging middle class and youth markets in the BRICS (Brazil,
Russia, India, China, and South Africa) countries is indicative of the
increasingly popular view that consumption and choice – what is
sometimes characterised as ‘consumer citizenship’– not only provides new
means to achieve different ends, but may also empower people to take
control over their own lives and pull themselves out of poverty.

One of the most interesting characteristics of this shift is that it
moves in two directions. Under multilateral partnerships for
development, welfare is being outsourced to companies, but this is not
the end of the story. The opposite is also occurring: companies
outsourcing aspects of consumer welfare to non-profits.[^30] For
example, when Mercy Corps ran a conditional cash grant program in Saint
Marc, Haiti, they gave away free mobile phones (supplied at reduced cost
by Voilá) and taught customers how to set up and use mobile money. Mercy
Corps were then able to transfer the conditional cash grants to their
beneficiaries’ T-Cash (mobile money) accounts. As a result, Mercy Corps
was able to both educate people in a new service and avoid certain costs
and difficulties involved in handing out cash or buying expensive,
fraud-proof certificates that their beneficiaries could redeem in retail
stores. Voilá, in turn, gained new customers for its network and its
mobile money service.

But what of the customers? It is worth noting that, in the case of Mercy
Corps’s cash grants and similar development programs, beneficiaries
received a clear benefit (cash or goods), but they did not have a choice
as to how they would receive their money.[^31] Hence one of the primary
purported benefits of market provision – consumer choice – is in this
case eroded by the reconfiguration of supply to encourage demand.
Somewhat ironically, while critics of the ‘products for the poor’ model
critique the idea that free markets can be harnessed to increase
consumer welfare and reduce the suffering that characterizes poverty, it
turns out that the market is not free at all.[^32]

## An Alternative, Inclusive Success Story?

The blurring of boundaries between private and public interests in
mobile money’s supply and demand suggest that, when objectified in
certain products, socioeconomic development and commerce lose their
distinction. Should we be worried that it is increasingly difficult to
tell profit motives apart from social ones? Are ‘social goods’ really
‘social bads’?

Like other microfinance products, mobile money has many social
applications, but it also comes with risks. Assessing these risks is
only possible if we have a clear view of what mobile money is, how it is
delivered, who is using it, and who is driving its uptake. When we tease
apart the mobile money supply chain, it becomes clear that the
stereotypical mobile money user can be rather different to the one
depicted in commercial advertisements. It also becomes evident that the
suppliers of mobile money are not just companies.

From a political economy perspective, one could argue that it is high
time that this financial inclusion – of the mobile money variety –
occurred. In his book *The Ascent of Money*, Niall Ferguson argues that
the development of financial products was a crucial component of the
industrial revolution.[^33] Among other things, financial services
facilitated the direction of capital to where it was needed. Countries
that innovated financially, such as the Netherlands, got ahead of the
curve in the global economy. Most of them are still strong today. In
contrast, countries that did not develop financial tools and systems,
focusing instead on traditional economic production, were left behind.
Financial tools assisted economic development through capitalization.
Moreover, finance itself became a major industry that is concentrated in
a handful of global cities, with a relatively small number of people
controlling the majority of capital. Today, the United Kingdom is the
largest exporter of financial services in the world, while the United
States and the majority of small countries are net importers of
financial services.

New financial products and services, such as smart cards and mobile
money, are unlikely to present a direct challenge to the global
distribution of wealth. First, organizations such as the GSMA contend
that mobile money services can contribute to economic growth, but to
date there appears to be no clear evidence of this. Indeed, there is no
clear evidence that microfinance contributes to economic growth after
four years of its existence.[^34] Of course, one could argue that it is
not mobile money alone that is intended to drive economic growth;
rather, it is infrastructure that forms part of a process of
development. This works much in the same way that a highway does not
have transformatory power by itself, but its effects are realized when
it is coupled with port facilities, schools, hospitals, banks, and
regulation reform. Hence, while it is difficult to measure the
contribution of mobile money to development, we should not be too hasty
to rule it out as a contributing factor.

Second, many mobile money services are run by companies that are at
least partially owned by foreign interests. For example, Vodafone U.K.
has a 40 percent stake in M-Pesa, arguably the most successful mobile
money service in the world with over 17 million subscribers. Digicel
TchoTcho in Haiti is a private company owned by Dennis O’ Brian and
headquartered in Kingston, Jamaica. The current trajectory of the global
mobile money market suggests, then, that it is unlikely to change the
position of poor countries as net importers of financial services.

Other challenges also need to be acknowledged. As we have seen with the
2008 global financial crisis, problems in the system can have
wide-reaching effects. As I have noted, mobile money and microfinance
are envisaged as initial steps to introduce customers to the formal
banking system. This increases the capacity of consumers to access
much-needed financial products, such as loans and insurance, but it also
exposes them to risk. The common wisdom that one should not put all of
one's financial eggs in the same basket seems increasingly difficult to
achieve when our financial systems are becoming so integrated that it is
impossible to predict where risk will come from, and to where it will
ultimately flow. The idea behind inclusive finance is to move capital to
the people who need it most, yet financial products tend to facilitate
the flow of capital from periphery to core.[^35]

What does this mean for mobile money? First and foremost, mobile money
is not just microfinance, it’s also finance – and on a global scale.
Mobile money collapses a wide range of interests into one platform, and
how we assess it depends upon where we are standing. From the
perspective of a Haitian trader, mobile money could be a very welcome
alternative to sending money via boat. For an NGO, paying a conditional
cash grant via mobile phone may be far easier, and safer, than paying
cash. But one thing is certainly clear: neither mobile money, nor other
initiatives in financial products in Haiti, presents an alternative to
the formal financial system. Rather, they integrate people squarely into
financial globalization.

This point matters irrespective of whether you believe financial
globalization is a good idea or not. Any financial product can be
problematic when rolled out without thorough consideration of its
intrinsic characteristics and the context in which it is being
delivered. The microcredit movement has benefited many people around the
world, but the oversupply of credit has also caused a great deal of
harm. Mobile money, which has the potential to reach far more people and
deliver the entire suite of microfinance products, also merits scrutiny.
Both the micro context of the stereotypical user, and the macro context
of finance, will influence if, where, and when mobile money can meet the
‘double bottom line’ of turning a profit and achieving social goals.

This means being realistic about whom mobile money is for. I don’t agree
with my colleague in the audience that mobile money can be called a
‘failure’ in any sense. The fact that uptake has not met over-hyped
expectations should not be surprising or particularly concerning. Is
mobile money successful in the eyes of development organizations and
their workers? Perhaps not yet, but they are working as hard as they can
to push its reach. Is mobile money viewed as successful by the companies
who provide the service? If they continue to offer it, then we must
assume that it is.

Is mobile money successful in meeting consumer needs? This latter
question is more difficult to answer, because people use mobile money in
different ways. I feel that the answer to this question depends upon
whether people have a choice to use it or not. People should not be
coerced into using it, but as Maarten Boute points out, nor can they
choose to adopt it if they don’t know what it is. And yet, even in
situations where people are informed and mobile money is a realistic
option, it needs monitoring. More of a platform than a product,[^36]
mobile money can easily be harnessed for ends that are truly useful to
customers and an alternative to other, more costly financial tools. But
the possibilities for mobile money to facilitate predatory lending and
fraud are also real.

All of these issues – good and bad – can be far more readily identified
if we change the way we ask questions about mobile money. Both the hype
and the scepticism need to give way to a more balanced approach to
mobile money that considers what socioeconomic value it provides, to
whom that value accrues, and what the consequences of different uses and
ways of providing it might be.

## Acknowledgements

The research discussed in this chapter was funded by the Institute for
Money, Technology and Financial Inclusion at the University of
California, Irvine, and carried out with Dr. Heather Horst and Dr.
Espelencia Baptiste. Thanks to Bill Maurer, Jenny Fan, Mariko Oda,
Stanley Celestin, and Gawain Lynch for support and assistance throughout
the project.

## References

Baptiste, Espelencia, Heather A. Horst, and Erin B. Taylor. *Haitian
Monetary Ecologies and Repertoires: A Qualitative Snapshot of Money
Transfer and Savings*, University of California Irvine: IMTFI, 2010.

Benioff, Marc and Karen Southwick. *Compassionate Capitalism: How
Corporations Can Make Doing Good an Integral Part of Doing Well*,
Pompton Plains, NJ: Career Press, 2004.

Camner, Gunnar, Caroline Pulner, and Emil Sjöblom. *What Makes a
Successful Mobile Money Implementation? Learnings from M-Pesa in Kenya
and Tanzania.* GSMA, 2012.

Ferguson, Niall. *The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the
World*, New York: Penguin, 2008.

Hammond, Allen. *The Next 4 Billion: Market Size and Business Strategy
at the Base of the Pyramid*, Washington D.C.: The World Resources
Institute, 2007.

Horst, Heather and Daniel Miller. *The Cell Phone: An Anthropology of
Communication*, Chicago: Berg Publishers, 2006.

InterMedia. ‘Mobile Money in Haiti: A Baseline Analysis of Access, Use
and Barriers to Adoption’, 2011,
<http://audiencescapes.org/country-profiles/haiti/mobile-money-haiti-baseline-analysis-Gates-adoption-financial-services-HMMI>.

Kendall, Jack, et al. ‘An Emerging Platform: From Money Transfer System
to Mobile Money Ecosystem’, *Innovations* 6.4 (2012): 49-64.

Kunsimba, et al. ‘Mobile Kin and Mobile Money: The Anthropology of
International Remittances in Kenya’, *IMTFI Working Paper*, 2013-1.

Mas, Ignacio and Dan Radcliffe. ‘Scaling Mobile Money’, *Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation*, 2010,
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1681245>.

Prahalad, Coimbatore Krishna. *The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid:
Eradicating Poverty Through Profits*. Revised and Updated 5th
Anniversary Edition, Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2009.

Roodman, David. *Due Diligence: An Impertinent Inquiry Into
Microfinance*, Washington: CGD Books, 2012.

Schwittay, Anke. ‘The Marketization of Poverty’, *Current Anthropology*
52.3 (2011): 71-82.

Suri Tavneet and Billy Jack. ‘Reaching the Poor: Mobile Banking and
Financial Inclusion’, *Slate*, 27 February 2012,
[*http://www.slate.com/blogs/future\_tense/2012/02/27/m\_pesa\_ict4d\_and\_mobile\_banking\_for\_the\_poor\_.html*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2012/02/27/m_pesa_ict4d_and_mobile_banking_for_the_poor_.html).

Taylor, Erin B., Baptiste Espelencia, and Heather A. Horst. *Mobile
Banking in Haiti: Possibilities and Challenges*. University of
California Irvine: IMTFI, 2011.

Taylor, Erin B. and Heather A Horst. ‘The Aesthetics of Mobile Money
Platforms in Haiti’, in G. Goggin and L. Hjorth (eds) *Routledge
Companion to Mobile Media*, New York: Routledge, 2014, pp. 462-471.

Verdier, Daniel. *Moving Money: Banking and Finance in the
Industrialized World*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

[^1]: David Roodman, *Due Diligence: An Impertinent Inquiry Into
    Microfinance*, Washington: CGD Books, 2012.

[^2]: See [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nEZ30K5dBWU*](styles.xml).

[^3]: For example, BRAC developed their ‘graduation model’ to ‘graduate
    the poorest from ultra-poverty’,
    [http://www.brac.net/content/end-sight-ultra-poverty-scaling-bracs-graduation-model-poorest.](stylesWithEffects.xml)
    Fonkoze in Haiti bases their Chemen Lavi Miyò program on this model,
    [*http://www.fonkoze.org/what-we-do/step-1-clm/*](settings.xml).

[^4]: World Bank,
    [*http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/10/02/Migrants-from-developing-countries-to-send-home-414-billion-in-earnings-in-2013*](webSettings.xml).

[^5]: IFAD, [*http://www.ifad.org/remittances/maps/*](footnotes.xml).

[^6]: Kusimba, ‘Mobile Kin and Mobile Money: The Anthropology of
    International Remittances in Kenya’, IMTFI Working Paper, 2013.

[^7]: Discussed by the GSMA,
    [*http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/the-rise-of-mobile-wallet-to-wallet-cross-border-remittance-services-whats-the-opportunity*](endnotes.xml)*.*

[^8]: Gunnar Camner, Caroline Pulner, and Emil Sjöblom, *What Makes a
    Successful Mobile Money Implementation? Learnings from M-Pesa in
    Kenya and Tanzania*, GSMA, 2012.

[^9]: InterMedia, ‘Mobile Money in Haiti: A Baseline Analysis of Access,
    Use and Barriers to Adoption’,
    [*http://audiencescapes.org/country-profiles/haiti/mobile-money-haiti-baseline-analysis-Gates-adoption-financial-services-HMMI*](http://audiencescapes.org/country-profiles/haiti/mobile-money-haiti-baseline-analysis-Gates-adoption-financial-services-HMMI).

[^10]: Tavneet Suri and Billy Jack, ‘Reaching the Poor: Mobile Banking
    and Financial Inclusion’, *Slate*, 27 February 2012,
    [*http://www.slate.com/blogs/future\_tense/2012/02/27/m\_pesa\_ict4d\_and\_mobile\_banking\_for\_the\_poor.html*](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1681245).

[^11]: This had two major advantages: it immediately added thousands of
    users to Vodafone’s mobile money network, and it solved a serious
    corruption problem. People in the industry report that, when police
    officers received their salaries via mobile money for the first
    time, many were calling Vodafone to thank them for their pay rise.
    It turns out that their superiors had been skimming their salaries
    by as much as 20 percent. With mobile money, this was no longer
    possible. See
    [*http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-04-13/afghan-police-now-paid-by-phone-to-cut-graft-in-anti-taliban-war.html*](http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2012/02/27/m_pesa_ict4d_and_mobile_banking_for_the_poor_.html).

[^12]: ‘10 Ways to Accelerate Mobile Money: USAID-Citi Mobile Money
    Accelerator Alliance, Citibank / USAID’ 2012, .

[^13]: See, for example, CGAP’s various blogs about merchant payments,
    including branchless banking in Brazil,
    [*http://www.cgap.org/blog/branchless-banking-brazil-making-it-work-small-merchants*](footer1.xml).

[^14]: Espelencia Baptiste, Heather A. Horst, and Erin B. Taylor,
    *Haitian Monetary Ecologies and Repertoires: A Qualitative Snapshot
    of Money Transfer and Savings*, University of California Irvine:
    IMTFI, 2010.

[^15]: This estimate is given by Fonkoze on their website,
    [*http://www.fonkoze.org/why-it-matters/key-statistics/*](fontTable.xml).

[^16]: See Baptiste, Horst and Taylor 2010; Taylor and Horst 2014.

[^17]: Personal communication from Greta Greathouse, Chief of Party of
    HIFIVE, 15 February 2012.

[^18]: Tate Watkins, ‘Overselling Mobile Money in Haiti’, *Haiti
    Rewired*, 11 June 2012,
    [http://haitirewired.wired.com/profiles/blog/show?id=4920407%3ABlogPost%3A77664&commentId=4920407%3AComment%3A78008&xg\_source=activity](theme/theme1.xml).

[^19]: See
    [*http://www.cgap.org/blog/m-insurance-ensuring-take-while-doing-no-harm*](http://www.cgap.org/blog/m-insurance-ensuring-take-while-doing-no-harm).

[^20]: Ignacio Mas and Dan Radcliffe, ‘Scaling Mobile Money’, Bill &
    Melinda Gates Foundation, 2010,
    <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1681245>.

[^21]: Haiti Mobile Money Initiative/HIFIVE, ‘Awards Grant to Mercy
    Corps to expand Mobile Money Services in Rural Areas’, Press
    release, 27 October 2010,
    [*http://www.microlinks.org/ev\_en.php?ID=46502\_201&ID2=DO\_TOPIC*](http://www.microlinks.org/ev_en.php?ID=46502_201&ID2=DO_TOPIC).

[^22]: See
    [*http://kdid.org/projects/field-support/hifive/hmmi*](http://kdid.org/projects/field-support/hifive/hmmi).

[^23]: See
    [*http://www.digicelhaiti.com/assets/uploads/Active\_Agent\_List.pdf*](http://www.digicelhaiti.com/assets/uploads/Active_Agent_List.pdf).

[^24]: ‘Mobile wallets help Haitians rebuild’, *Mercy Corps*, 3 August
    2011,
    [*http://www.mercycorps.org/articles/haiti/mobile-wallets-help-haitians-rebuild*](http://www.mercycorps.org/articles/haiti/mobile-wallets-help-haitians-rebuild);
    see USAID for World Vision’s involvement,
    [*http://www.usaid.gov/news-information/fact-sheets/haiti-mobile-money-initiative*](http://www.usaid.gov/news-information/fact-sheets/haiti-mobile-money-initiative).

[^25]: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation/Dalberg,‘Haiti Mobile Money: A
    Point-In-Time Case Study’,
    [*http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Haiti-Mobile-Money.pdf*](http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Haiti-Mobile-Money.pdf).

[^26]: ‘Helping Ti Manman Cheri in Haiti: Offering Mobile Money-Based
    Government-to-Person Payments in Haiti’, *Bankable Frontier
    Associates for CGAP*, July 2013,
    [*http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/eg2p\_Haiti.pdf*](http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/eg2p_Haiti.pdf).

[^27]: C.K. Prahalad, *The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid:
    Eradicating Poverty Through Profits*, Revised and Updated 5th
    Anniversary Edition, Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press, 2009.

[^28]: Marc Benioff and Karen Southwick, *Compassionate Capitalism: How
    Corporations Can Make Doing Good an Integral Part of Doing Well*,
    Pompton Plains, NJ: Career Press, 2004.

[^29]: Allen Hammond, *The Next 4 Billion: Market Size and Business
    Strategy at the Base of the Pyramid*, Washington D.C.: The World
    Resources Institute, 2007.

[^30]: It is worth noting that the blurring of the line between commerce
    and development goes both ways. Digicel have a great deal of
    experience in building social concerns into their products. When
    Digicel arrived in Jamaica in 2001, they cornered the market with
    inexpensive handsets and calls, making them affordable for the first
    time to millions. Their handsets incorporated features that were
    designed especially for people with little money, such as their
    ‘call me’ service. See Heather Horst and Daniel Miller. *The Cell
    Phone: An Anthropology of Communication*, Chicago: Berg Publishers,
    2006.

[^31]: Privacy is also a growing issue, especially in cases where people
    must supply biometric information to register for financial products
    such as bankcards. See
    [*http://www.usaid.gov/results-data/success-stories/biometric-technology-improves-financial-services*](http://www.usaid.gov/results-data/success-stories/biometric-technology-improves-financial-services).

[^32]: Anke Schwittay, ‘The Marketization of Poverty’, *Current
    Anthropology* 52.3 (2011): 71-82.

[^33]: Niall Ferguson, *The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the
    World*, New York: Penguin, 2008.

[^34]: David Roodman, *Due Diligence.*

[^35]: Daniel Verdier, *Moving Money: Banking and Finance in the
    Industrialized World*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

[^36]: Kendall, ‘An Emerging Platform’.
