---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...

<!--
Figures missing
-->


# The MonelyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit for Creatives

### Irina Enache and Robert van Boeschoten {.author}

The MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit (MCT) helps creatives explore the
opportunities and challenges of an increasingly popular form of
alternative revenue. The Toolkit’s aim is to better inform prospective
crowdfunding campaigners on what the crowdfunding process entails before
they start a campaign.

In its practical form, the toolkit is a website.[^1] In what follows we
briefly introduce the three main components of the Toolkit: several
in-depth interviews with users, statistics based on a survey of
creatives using crowdfunding, and an interactive graph of 60 Dutch and
international crowdfunding websites. We conclude with some insights into
future needs of the crowdfunding model.

## Adding the Missing Voice

An important issue with the ongoing crowdfunding hype is that the voices
of creative workers – the ones actually using crowdfunding platforms as
a way to finance their projects – are missing from the debate.
Therefore, the MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit draws from eight interviews
with practitioners experienced in crowdfunding and active in various
creative sectors (performance and theater, music, filmmaking, social
entrepreneurship, publishing, etc.) to identify the opportunities and
challenges of crowdfunding from their perspectives. The interviews
inquired into what motivated these professionals to crowdfund, what
challenges and opportunities they identified, their relationship to the
crowdfunding platform, to the funders, to their project, and whether
they would do it again.

The interviews offer prospective campaigners a firsthand experience of
what crowdfunding involves, both positive and negative. For instance,
all interviewees stated that crowdfunding is more than just about
raising money; it helps to build a community around a project, and it is
an organized way to involve one’s personal network. The process also
makes the person or group who are crowdfunding feel more independent
from traditional forms of finance. Yet the interviewees hinted that
crowdfunding platforms at this moment do not suit people working in the
arts and culture sector. This situation has to do with the business
model used by the crowdfunding platforms, the amount of time and effort
required to work on a crowdfunding campaign, and the reliance on friends
and family for money. The widely held notion that crowdfunding helps you
find an anonymous crowd actively participating and financially
supporting your project is questionable.

## What Does Crowdfunding Involve? Some Numbers

Second, the Toolkit addresses the lack of informational resources at
hand for those who are planning to start a crowdfunding campaign. What
do creatives need to know before deciding to crowdfund? The Toolkit
discusses the statistics gained via a survey that asked creatives with
crowdfunding experience about the challenges of the process.

Below are some of these graphs, showing statistics on the amount of
hours people put into their campaign; how many funders they had; who
they were (family and friends? acquaintances? strangers?); how they were
reached (via social media, face to face, email, or formal meetings), as
well as the average financial contribution received.

[Fig. 1: Time invested in the crowdfunding campaign.]

The upper figures represent number of hours invested. The lower figures
represent the number of responses. The amount of time people invested in
a campaign was on average between ten and fifteen hours a week, but a
tenth of all respondents worked on their campaign over 30 hours a week.

[Fig. 2: The main activities of the crowdfunding process and the time
invested in them.]

The figures in the circles represent the number of responses. Here it
becomes obvious that most of the time of a campaign (almost half) is
spent on promoting it. The majority of respondents did not have
dedicated expertise in this field and instead needed to perform the task
themselves.

[Fig. 3: Who funded the campaigns? The segmentation of funders according
to their relation with the campaigner.]

An interesting outcome was that we could see who the funders were. The
majority of funders were close relatives. Thus the idea of an anonymous
crowd helping with one’s campaign seems to be questionable.

[Fig. 4: Types of external help received or needed during the
crowdfunding campaign.]

Figures represent number of responses. The figures show 1/3 needed
external help in their campaign, mainly on research on how to develop
different aspects of the campaign.

[Fig. 5: 35 out of 60 respondents would crowdfund again. Figures
represent numbers of responses.]

## Visualizing Crowdfunding Platforms

There are hundreds of crowdfunding platforms worldwide, and most offer
very little insight into what happens behind their popular
interfaces.[^2] To tackle this issue the Toolkit’s third feature is an
interactive visualization that allows prospective campaigners to explore
60 Dutch and international crowdfunding platforms, as well as look into
various in-depth statistics that have not been available before. The
Toolkit is useful for projects that aim to raise less than 50,000 Euro;
it draws from the Dutch context of crowdfunding and is therefore
particularly useful for Dutch creatives.

The Toolkit allows filtering and sorting of the crowdfunding platforms,
according to the following data:

-   The total amount of money raised (by all successful campaigns).

-   The type of projects they host.

-   The crowdfunding model they use (donation / equity / loans /
    pre–order / subscription).

-   The type of rewards that platforms allow (symbolic, product, shares,
    none).

-   Whether they are suited for small (5,000 Euro\<), medium
    (5,000-10,000 Euro) or large (\>10,000 Euro) budget campaigns.

-   The total amount of money raised (by all successful campaigns).

-   The average financial contribution that a funder gives to a
    successful campaign.

-   The average number of funders for a successful campaign.

[Fig. 6: The interactive visualization – the legend that explains the
visual encodings.]

[Fig. 7: The Toolkit’s filtering and sorting options.]

[Fig. 8: The results displayed after opting for the filter and sorting
options in Fig. 8.]

## In Closing: Critical Comments on the Future of Crowdfunding Platforms

Crowdfunding is commonly hailed as the new, democratic and transparent
finance model for creative industries. However, crowdfunding is a
business model, even when based on donations; once a campaign has
started, all efforts are directed to marketing, outreach, and meeting
the goal by any means. While seemingly making creative workers
independent of or less dependent on traditional funding sources,
crowdfunding platforms pin crowdfunders down to the business dynamics of
the platform in question. Crowdfunding is perhaps even more complicated
than traditional applications for funds or sponsorships; it comes with
an extra baggage of time, free effort, multiple roles, and reliance on
personal networks. But it also brings much added value, which explains
why many people would try it again.

Also problematic, most crowdfunding websites hide particular types of
information. For instance, the majority of crowdfunding campaigns
fail,[^3] and these unsuccessful campaigns are rarely visible on
crowdfunding platforms. Most of the browsing filters on crowdfunding
platforms are designed to display only positive results and successful
campaigns. Some crowdfunding platforms even have a policy of erasing
unsuccessful campaigns or making them hard if not impossible to find on
their websites. These design choices made it impossible to add ‘success
ratio’ data to the Toolkit. This lack of transparency also causes
misinformation, offering too much of an optimistic view of what
crowdfunding can do. This design becomes problematic when the business
model and design interface of big players such as Indiegogo.com are
copy-pasted by most crowdfunding platforms, old or new; it perpetuates
their faults.

Making internal data public and existing public data easier to find is a
first step to assist prospective campaigners and allow further research.
Some crowdfunding platforms have already adopted this slightly different
approach. SciFund Challenge, one of the very few crowdfunding platforms
dedicated to research and science, updates regular statistics on average
donation, funders, progress of campaigns, etc. Ulule, a French platform
with international activity, does the same. Others take a step further
and have adapted the platform to serve not only crowdfunding purposes
but also crowdsourcing ones, such as Goteo. The next step is rethinking
the standard design of platforms in order to better respond to the
disparate needs of people using it. One standard interface and a suite
of standardized services cannot provide an accurate response to these
very different needs.

## References

Amsterdams Fonds voor de Kunst, http://www.amsterdamsfondsvoordekunst.nl/wat-wij-doen/voordekunst/
Culture Crowd UK,

Jeffers, Adrianne. ‘Indie No-go: Only One in Ten Projects Gets Fully
Funded on Kickstarter's Biggest Rival’, The Verge, 7 August 2013,

Kickstarter,

Mondriaan Fonds,

MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit,
[www.networkcultures.org/moneylab-toolkit](http://www.networkcultures.org/moneylab-toolkit).

[^1]: MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit,
    [www.networkcultures.org/moneylab-toolkit](http://www.networkcultures.org/moneylab-toolkit).
    The research and design for the MoneyLab Crowdfunding Toolkit was
    conducted and coordinated by the Institute of Network Cultures as
    part of the MoneyLab: Coining Alternatives project in 2013-2014.
    Credits for the visual design of the toolkit go to Gabriele Colombo.

[^2]: Each crowdfunding platform in the Toolkit was asked for the data.
    Some responded with figures, others declined to share the
    information, while others never replied. When data such as average
    donation and number of contributors was not provided by the platform
    itself, it was gathered from the fifteen most recent successful
    projects.

[^3]: Adrianne Jeffers, ‘Indie No-Go: Only One in Ten Projects Gets
    Fully Funded on Kickstarter’s Biggest Rival’, *The Verge*, 7 August
    2013,
    <http://www.theverge.com/2013/8/7/4594824/less-than-10-percent-of-projects-on-indiegogo-get-fully-funded>.
